<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">I</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">I have</span> noticed that when someone asks for you on
the telephone and, finding you out, leaves a message
begging you to call him up the moment you come in,
and it’s important, the matter is more often important
to him than to you. When it comes to making
you a present or doing you a favour most people are
able to hold their impatience within reasonable
bounds. So when I got back to my lodgings with just
enough time to have a drink, a cigarette, and to read
my paper before dressing for dinner, and was told
by Miss Fellows, my landlady, that Mr. Alroy Kear
wished me to ring him up at once, I felt that I could
safely ignore his request.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Is that the writer?” she asked me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It is.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She gave the telephone a friendly glance.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Shall I get him?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, thank you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What shall I say if he rings again?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ask him to leave a message.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Very good, sir.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She pursed her lips. She took the empty siphon,
swept the room with a look to see that it was tidy,
and went out. Miss Fellows was a great novel reader.
I was sure that she had read all Roy’s books. Her
disapproval of my casualness suggested that she had
read them with admiration. When I got home again,
I found a note in her bold, legible writing on the
sideboard.</p>

<div class="blockquote100percent">

<p class="pindent"><span class="it">Mr. Kear rang up twice. Can you lunch with him to-morrow?
If not what day will suit you?</span></p>

</div>

<p class="pindent">I raised my eyebrows. I had not seen Roy for
three months and then only for a few minutes at a
party; he had been very friendly, he always was, and
when we separated he had expressed his hearty regret
that we met so seldom.</p>

<p class="pindent">“London’s awful,” he said. “One never has time
to see any of the people one wants to. Let’s lunch
together one day next week, shall we?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’d like to,” I replied.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll look at my book when I get home and ring
you up.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I had not known Roy for twenty years without
learning that he always kept in the upper left-hand
pocket of his waistcoat the little book in which he
put down his engagements; I was therefore not surprised
when I heard from him no further. It was
impossible for me now to persuade myself that this
urgent desire of his to dispense hospitality was disinterested.
As I smoked a pipe before going to bed
I turned over in my mind the possible reasons for
which Roy might want me to lunch with him. It might
be that an admirer of his had pestered him to introduce
me to her or that an American editor, in
London for a few days, had desired Roy to put me
in touch with him; but I could not do my old friend
the injustice of supposing him so barren of devices as
not to be able to cope with such a situation. Besides,
he told me to choose my own day, so it could hardly
be that he wished me to meet anyone else.</p>

<p class="pindent">Than Roy no one could show a more genuine cordiality
to a fellow novelist whose name was on everybody’s
lips, but no one could more genially turn a cold
shoulder on him when idleness, failure, or someone
else’s success had cast a shade on his notoriety. The
writer has his ups and downs, and I was but too
conscious that at the moment I was not in the public
eye. It was obvious that I might have found excuses
without affront to refuse Roy’s invitation, though he
was a determined fellow and if he was resolved for
purposes of his own to see me, I well knew that
nothing short of a downright “go to hell” would
check his persistence; but I was beset by curiosity.
I had also a considerable affection for Roy.</p>

<p class="pindent">I had watched with admiration his rise in the
world of letters. His career might well have served
as a model for any young man entering upon the pursuit
of literature. I could think of no one among my
contemporaries who had achieved so considerable
a position on so little talent. This, like the wise man’s
daily dose of Bemax, might have gone into a heaped-up
tablespoon. He was perfectly aware of it, and it
must have seemed to him sometimes little short of a
miracle that he had been able with it to compose
already some thirty books. I cannot but think that he
saw the white light of revelation when first he read
that Charles Dickens in an after-dinner speech had
stated that genius was an infinite capacity for taking
pains. He pondered the saying. If that was all, he
must have told himself, he could be a genius like the
rest; and when the excited reviewer of a lady’s paper,
writing a notice of one of his works, used the word
(and of late the critics have been doing it with agreeable
frequency) he must have sighed with the satisfaction
of one who after long hours of toil has completed
a cross-word puzzle. No one who for years
had observed his indefatigable industry could deny
that at all events he deserved to be a genius.</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy started with certain advantages. He was the
only son of a civil servant who after being Colonial
Secretary for many years in Hong-Kong ended his
career as Governor of Jamaica. When you looked
up Alroy Kear in the serried pages of <span class="it">Who’s Who</span>
you saw <span class="it">o. s.</span> of Sir Raymond Kear, K. C. M. G.,
K.C.V.O. <span class="it">q.v.</span> and of Emily, <span class="it">y.d.</span> of the late Major
General Percy Camperdown, Indian Army. He was
educated at Winchester and at New College, Oxford.
He was president of the Union and but for
an unfortunate attack of measles might very well
have got his rowing blue. His academic career was
respectable rather than showy, and he left the university
without a debt in the world. Roy was even
then of a thrifty habit, without any inclination to
unprofitable expense, and he was a good son. He
knew that it had been a sacrifice to his parents to
give him so costly an education. His father, having
retired, lived in an unpretentious, but not mean,
house near Stroud in Gloucestershire, but at intervals
went to London to attend official dinners connected
with the colonies he had administered, and on these
occasions was in the habit of visiting the Athenæum,
of which he was a member. It was through an old
crony at this club that he was able to get his son,
when he came down from Oxford, appointed private
secretary to a politician who, after having made a
fool of himself as Secretary of State in two Conservative
administrations, had been rewarded with
a peerage. This gave Roy a chance to become acquainted
at an early age with the great world. He
made good use of his opportunities. You will never
find in his works any of the solecisms that disfigure
the productions of those who have studied the upper
circles of society only in the pages of the illustrated
papers. He knew exactly how dukes spoke to one
another, and the proper way they should be addressed
respectively by a member of Parliament, an
attorney, a book-maker, and a valet. There is something
captivating in the jauntiness with which in his
early novels he handles viceroys, ambassadors, prime
ministers, royalties, and great ladies. He is friendly
without being patronizing and familiar without being
impertinent. He does not let you forget their
rank, but shares with you his comfortable feeling
that they are of the same flesh as you and I. I
always think it a pity that, fashion having decided
that the doings of the aristocracy are no longer a
proper subject for serious fiction, Roy, always keenly
sensitive to the tendency of the age, should in his
later novels have confined himself to the spiritual
conflicts of solicitors, chartered accountants, and
produce brokers. He does not move in these circles
with his old assurance.</p>

<p class="pindent">I knew him first soon after he resigned his secretaryship
to devote himself exclusively to literature,
and he was then a fine, upstanding young man, six
feet high in his stockinged feet and of an athletic
build, with broad shoulders and a confident carriage.
He was not handsome, but in a manly way agreeable
to look at, with wide blue frank eyes and curly hair
of a lightish brown; his nose was rather short and
broad, his chin square. He looked honest, clean, and
healthy. He was something of an athlete. No one
who has read in his early books the descriptions of
a run with the hounds, so vivid, and so accurate, can
doubt that he wrote from personal experience; and
until quite lately he was willing now and then to
desert his desk for a day’s hunting. He published
his first novel at the period when men of letters, to
show their virility, drank beer and played cricket,
and for some years there was seldom a literary
eleven in which his name did not figure. This particular
school, I hardly know why, has lost its bravery,
their books are neglected, and cricketers though they
have remained, they find difficulty in placing their
articles. Roy ceased playing cricket a good many
years ago and he has developed a fine taste for claret.</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy was very modest about his first novel. It was
short, neatly written, and, as is everything he has
produced since, in perfect taste. He sent it with a
pleasant letter to all the leading writers of the day,
and in this he told each one how greatly he admired
his works, how much he had learned from his study
of them, and how ardently he aspired to follow, albeit
at a humble distance, the trail his correspondent had
blazed. He laid his book at the feet of a great artist
as the tribute of a young man entering upon the
profession of letters to one whom he would always
look up to as his master. Deprecatingly, fully conscious
of his audacity in asking so busy a man to
waste his time on a neophyte’s puny effort, he begged
for criticism and guidance. Few of the replies were
perfunctory. The authors he wrote to, flattered by
his praise, answered at length. They commended his
book; many of them asked him to luncheon. They
could not fail to be charmed by his frankness and
warmed by his enthusiasm. He asked for their advice
with a humility that was touching and promised
to act upon it with a sincerity that was impressive.
Here, they felt, was someone worth taking a little
trouble over.</p>

<p class="pindent">His novel had a considerable success. It made him
many friends in literary circles and in a very short
while you could not go to a tea party in Bloomsbury,
Campden Hill, or Westminster without finding him
handing round bread and butter or disembarrassing
an elderly lady of an empty cup. He was so young,
so bluff, so gay, he laughed so merrily at other
people’s jokes that no one could help liking him. He
joined dining clubs where in the basement of a hotel
in Victoria Street or Holborn men of letters, young
barristers, and ladies in Liberty silks and strings of
beads ate a three-and-sixpenny dinner and discussed
art and literature. It was soon discovered that he
had a pretty gift for after-dinner speaking. He was
so pleasant that his fellow writers, his rivals and
contemporaries, forgave him even the fact that he
was a gentleman. He was generous in his praise of
their fledgeling works, and when they sent him
manuscripts to criticize could never find a thing amiss.
They thought him not only a good sort, but a sound
judge.</p>

<p class="pindent">He wrote a second novel. He took great pains
with it and he profited by the advice his elders in the
craft had given him. It was only just that more than
one should at his request write a review for a paper
with whose editor Roy had got into touch and only
natural that the review should be flattering. His
second novel was successful, but not so successful as
to arouse the umbrageous susceptibilities of his competitors.
In fact it confirmed them in their suspicions
that he would never set the Thames on fire. He was
a jolly good fellow; no side, or anything like that:
they were quite content to give a leg up to a man
who would never climb so high as to be an obstacle
to themselves. I know some who smile bitterly now
when they reflect on the mistake they made.</p>

<p class="pindent">But when they say that he is swollen-headed they
err. Roy has never lost the modesty which in his
youth was his most engaging trait.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I know I’m not a great novelist,” he will tell you.
“When I compare myself with the giants I simply
don’t exist. I used to think that one day I should
write a really great novel, but I’ve long ceased even
to hope for that. All I want people to say is that I
do my best. I do work. I never let anything slipshod
get past me. I think I can tell a good story and I
can create characters that ring true. And after all
the proof of the pudding is in the eating: <span class="it">The Eye
of the Needle</span> sold thirty-five thousand in England
and eighty thousand in America, and for the serial
rights of my next book I’ve got the biggest terms
I’ve ever had yet.”</p>

<p class="pindent">And what, after all, can it be other than modesty
that makes him even now write to the reviewers of
his books, thanking them for their praise, and ask
them to luncheon? Nay, more: when someone has
written a stinging criticism and Roy, especially since
his reputation became so great, has had to put up
with some very virulent abuse, he does not, like most
of us, shrug his shoulders, fling a mental insult at
the ruffian who does not like our work, and then
forget about it; he writes a long letter to his critic,
telling him that he is very sorry he thought his book
bad, but his review was so interesting in itself, and
if he might venture to say so, showed so much critical
sense and so much feeling for words, that he felt
bound to write to him. No one is more anxious to
improve himself than he and he hopes he is still
capable of learning. He does not want to be a bore,
but if the critic has nothing to do on Wednesday
or Friday will he come and lunch at the Savoy and
tell him why exactly he thought his book so bad?
No one can order a lunch better than Roy, and generally
by the time the critic has eaten half a dozen
oysters and a cut from a saddle of baby lamb, he
has eaten his words too. It is only poetic justice
that when Roy’s next novel comes out the critic
should see in the new work a very great advance.</p>

<p class="pindent">One of the difficulties that a man has to cope with
as he goes through life is what to do about the persons
with whom he has once been intimate and whose
interest for him has in due course subsided. If both
parties remain in a modest station the break comes
about naturally, and no ill feeling subsists, but if
one of them achieves eminence the position is awkward.
He makes a multitude of new friends, but the
old ones are inexorable; he has a thousand claims on
his time, but they feel that they have the first right
to it. Unless he is at their beck and call they sigh
and with a shrug of the shoulders say:</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ah, well, I suppose you’re like everyone else. I
must expect to be dropped now that you’re a success.”</p>

<p class="pindent">That of course is what he would like to do if he
had the courage. For the most part he hasn’t. He
weakly accepts an invitation to supper on Sunday
evening. The cold roast beef is frozen and comes
from Australia and was over-cooked at middle day;
and the burgundy—ah, why will they call it burgundy?
Have they never been to Beaune and stayed at the
Hôtel de la Poste? Of course it is grand to talk of the
good old days when you shared a crust of bread in a
garret together, but it is a little disconcerting when
you reflect how near to a garret is the room you are
sitting in. You feel ill at ease when your friend tells
you that his books don’t sell and that he can’t place
his short stories; the managers won’t even read his
plays, and when he compares them with some of the
stuff that’s put on (here he fixes you with an accusing
eye) it really does seem a bit hard. You are embarrassed
and you look away. You exaggerate the
failures you have had in order that he may realize
that life has its hardships for you too. You refer to
your work in the most disparaging way you can and
are a trifle taken aback to find that your host’s opinion
of it is the same as yours. You speak of the fickleness
of the public so that he may comfort himself by
thinking that your popularity cannot last. He is a
friendly but severe critic.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I haven’t read your last book,” he says, “but I
read the one before. I’ve forgotten its name.”</p>

<p class="pindent">You tell him.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I was rather disappointed in it. I didn’t think
it was quite so good as some of the things you’ve
done. Of course you know which my favourite is.”</p>

<p class="pindent">And you, having suffered from other hands than
his, answer at once with the name of the first book
you ever wrote; you were twenty then, and it was
crude and ingenuous, and on every page was written
your inexperience.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’ll never do anything so good as that,” he
says heartily, and you feel that your whole career
has been a long decadence from that one happy hit.
“I always think you’ve never <span class="it">quite</span> fulfilled the promise
you showed then.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The gas fire roasts your feet, but your hands are
icy. You look at your wrist watch surreptitiously and
wonder whether your old friend would think it offensive
if you took your leave as early as ten. You have
told your car to wait round the corner so that it
should not stand outside the door and by its magnificence
affront his poverty, but at the door he says:</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’ll find a bus at the bottom of the street. I’ll
just walk down with you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Panic seizes you and you confess that you have
a car. He finds it very odd that the chauffeur should
wait round the corner. You answer that this is one
of his idiosyncrasies. When you reach it your friend
looks at it with tolerant superiority. You nervously
ask him to dinner with you one day. You promise to
write to him and you drive away wondering whether
when he comes he will think you are swanking if you
ask him to Claridge’s or mean if you suggest Soho.</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy Kear suffered from none of these tribulations.
It sounds a little brutal to say that when he
had got all he could out of people he dropped them;
but it would take so long to put the matter more
delicately, and would need so subtle an adjustment
of hints, half-tones, and allusions, playful or tender,
that such being at bottom the fact, I think it as well
to leave it at that. Most of us when we do a caddish
thing harbour resentment against the person we have
done it to, but Roy’s heart, always in the right place,
never permitted him such pettiness. He could use
a man very shabbily without afterward bearing him
the slightest ill-will.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Poor old Smith,” he would say. “He is a dear;
I’m so fond of him. Pity he’s growing so bitter. I
wish one could do something for him. No, I haven t
seen him for years. It’s no good trying to keep up
old friendships. It’s painful for both sides. The fact
is, one grows out of people, and the only thing is
to face it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But if he ran across Smith at some gathering like
the private view of the Royal Academy no one could
be more cordial. He wrung his hand and told him
how delighted he was to see him. His face beamed.
He shed good fellowship as the kindly sun its rays.
Smith rejoiced in the glow of this wonderful vitality
and it was damned decent of Roy to say he’d give
his eye-teeth to have written a book half as good as
Smith’s last. On the other hand, if Roy thought
Smith had not seen him, he looked the other way;
but Smith <span class="it">had</span> seen him, and Smith resented being cut.
Smith was very acid. He said that in the old days Roy
had been glad enough to share a steak with him in a
shabby restaurant and spend a month’s holiday in a
fisherman’s cottage at St. Ives. Smith said that Roy
was a time server. He said he was a snob. He said
he was a humbug.</p>

<p class="pindent">Smith was wrong here. The most shining characteristic
of Alroy Kear was his sincerity. No one can
be a humbug for five-and-twenty years. Hypocrisy is
the most difficult and nerve-racking vice that any
man can pursue; it needs an unceasing vigilance and
a rare detachment of spirit. It cannot, like adultery
or gluttony, be practised at spare moments; it is a
whole-time job. It needs also a cynical humour;
although Roy laughed so much I never thought he
had a very quick sense of humour, and I am quite sure
that he was incapable of cynicism. Though I have
finished few of his novels, I have begun a good many,
and to my mind his sincerity is stamped on every one
of their multitudinous pages. This is clearly the chief
ground of his stable popularity. Roy has always sincerely
believed what everyone else believed at the
moment. When he wrote novels about the aristocracy
he sincerely believed that its members were dissipated
and immoral, and yet had a certain nobility
and an innate aptitude for governing the British
Empire; when later he wrote of the middle classes
he sincerely believed that they were the backbone
of the country. His villains have always been villainous,
his heroes heroic, and his maidens chaste.</p>

<p class="pindent">When Roy asked the author of a flattering review
to lunch it was because he was sincerely grateful to
him for his good opinion, and when he asked the
author of an unflattering one it was because he was
sincerely concerned to improve himself. When unknown
admirers from Texas or western Australia
came to London it was not only to cultivate his public
that he took them to the National Gallery, it was
because he was sincerely anxious to observe their
reactions to art. You had only to hear him lecture to
be convinced of his sincerity.</p>

<p class="pindent">When he stood on the platform, in evening dress
admirably worn, or in a loose, much used but perfectly
cut, lounge suit if it better fitted the occasion,
and faced his audience seriously, frankly, but with
an engaging diffidence you could not but realize that
he was giving himself up to his task with complete
earnestness. Though now and then he pretended to
be at a loss for a word, it was only to make it more
effective when he uttered it. His voice was full and
manly. He told a story well. He was never dull. He
was fond of lecturing upon the younger writers of
England and America, and he explained their merits
to his audience with an enthusiasm that attested his
generosity. Perhaps he told almost too much, for
when you had heard his lecture you felt that you
really knew all you wanted to about them and it was
quite unnecessary to read their books. I suppose that
is why when Roy had lectured in some provincial
town not a single copy of the books of the authors
he had spoken of was ever asked for, but there was
always a run on his own. His energy was prodigious.
Not only did he make successful tours of the United
States, but he lectured up and down Great Britain.
No club was so small, no society for the self-improvement
of its members so insignificant, that
Roy disdained to give it an hour of his time. Now
and then he revised his lectures and issued them in
neat little books. Most people who are interested in
these things have at least looked through the works
entitled <span class="it">Modern Novelists</span>, <span class="it">Russian Fiction</span>, and
<span class="it">Some Writers</span>; and few can deny that they exhibit a
real feeling for literature and a charming personality.</p>

<p class="pindent">But this by no means exhausted his activities. He
was an active member of the organizations that have
been founded to further the interests of authors or
to alleviate their hard lot when sickness or old age
has brought them to penury. He was always willing
to give his help when matters of copyright were the
subject of legislation and he was never unprepared to
take his place in those missions to a foreign country
which are devised to establish amicable relations between
writers of different nationalities. He could
be counted on to reply for literature at a public
dinner and he was invariably on the reception committee
formed to give a proper welcome to a literary
celebrity from overseas. No bazaar lacked an autographed
copy of at least one of his books. He never
refused to grant an interview. He justly said that
no one knew better than he the hardships of the
author’s trade and if he could help a struggling journalist
to earn a few guineas by having a pleasant
chat with him he had not the inhumanity to refuse.
He generally asked his interviewer to luncheon and
seldom failed to make a good impression on him.
The only stipulation he made was that he should
see the article before it was published. He was never
impatient with the persons who call up the celebrated
on the telephone at inconvenient moments to
ask them for the information of newspaper readers
whether they believe in God or what they eat for
breakfast. He figured in every symposium and the
public knew what he thought of prohibition, vegetarianism,
jazz, garlic, exercise, marriage, politics,
and the place of women in the home.</p>

<p class="pindent">His views on marriage were abstract, for he had
successfully evaded the state which so many artists
have found difficult to reconcile with the arduous
pursuit of their calling. It was generally known that
he had for some years cherished a hopeless passion
for a married woman of rank, and though he never
spoke of her but with chivalrous admiration, it was
understood that she had treated him with harshness.
The novels of his middle period reflected in their unwonted
bitterness the strain to which he had been
put. The anguish of spirit he had passed through
then enabled him without offense to elude the advances
of ladies of little reputation, frayed ornaments
of a hectic circle, who were willing to exchange an
uncertain present for the security of marriage with
a successful novelist. When he saw in their bright
eyes the shadow of the registry office he told them
that the memory of his one great love would always
prevent him from forming any permanent tie. His
quixotry might exasperate, but could not affront
them. He sighed a little when he reflected that he
must be for ever denied the joys of domesticity and
the satisfaction of parenthood, but it was a sacrifice
that he was prepared to make not only to his ideal,
but also to the possible partner of his joys. He had
noticed that people really do not want to be bothered
with the wives of authors and painters. The
artist who insisted on taking his wife wherever he
went only made himself a nuisance and indeed was
in consequence often not asked to places he would
have liked to go to; and if he left his wife at home,
he was on his return exposed to recriminations that
shattered the repose so essential for him to do the
best that was in him. Alroy Kear was a bachelor and
now at fifty was likely to remain one.</p>

<p class="pindent">He was an example of what an author can do, and
to what heights he can rise, by industry, common-sense,
honesty, and the efficient combination of means
and ends. He was a good fellow and none but a cross-grained
carper could grudge him his success. I felt
that to fall asleep with his image in my mind would
insure me a good night. I scribbled a note to Miss
Fellows, knocked the ashes out of my pipe, put out
the light in my sitting room, and went to bed.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">II</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">When</span> I rang for my letters and the papers next
morning a message was delivered to me, in answer
to my note to Miss Fellows, that Mr. Alroy Kear
expected me at one-fifteen at his club in St. James’s
Street; so a little before one I strolled round to my
own and had the cocktail, which I was pretty sure
Roy would not offer me. Then I walked down St.
James’s Street, looking idly at the shop windows, and
since I had still a few minutes to spare (I did not
want to keep my appointment too punctually) I
went into Christie’s to see if there was anything I
liked the look of. The auction had already begun
and a group of dark, small men were passing round
to one another pieces of Victorian silver, while the
auctioneer, following their gestures with bored eyes,
muttered in a drone: “Ten shillings offered, eleven,
eleven and six” . . . It was a fine day, early in June,
and the air in King Street was bright. It made the
pictures on the walls of Christie’s look very dingy.
I went out. The people in the street walked with a
kind of nonchalance, as though the ease of the day
had entered into their souls and in the midst of their
affairs they had a sudden and surprised inclination to
stop and look at the picture of life.</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy’s club was sedate. In the ante-chamber were
only an ancient porter and a page; and I had a sudden
and melancholy feeling that the members were all
attending the funeral of the head waiter. The page,
when I had uttered Roy’s name, led me into an
empty passage to leave my hat and stick and then
into an empty hall hung with life-sized portraits of
Victorian statesmen. Roy got up from a leather sofa
and warmly greeted me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Shall we go straight up?” he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">I was right in thinking that he would not offer me
a cocktail and I commended my prudence. He led me
up a noble flight of heavily carpeted stairs, and we
passed nobody on the way; we entered the strangers’
dining room, and we were its only occupants. It was
a room of some size, very clean and white, with an
Adam window. We sat down by it and a demure
waiter handed us the bill of fare. Beef, mutton and
lamb, cold salmon, apple tart, rhubarb tart, gooseberry
tart. As my eye travelled down the inevitable
list I sighed as I thought of the restaurants round
the corner where there was French cooking, the
clatter of life, and pretty painted women in summer
frocks.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I can recommend the veal-and-ham pie,” said Roy.</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll mix the salad myself,” he told the waiter in
an off-hand and yet commanding way, and then, casting
his eye once more on the bill of fare, generously:
“And what about some asparagus to follow?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That would be very nice.”</p>

<p class="pindent">His manner grew a trifle grander.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Asparagus for two and tell the chef to choose
them himself. Now what would you like to drink?
What do you say to a bottle of hock? We rather
fancy our hock here.”</p>

<p class="pindent">When I had agreed to this he told the waiter to
call the wine steward. I could not but admire the
authoritative and yet perfectly polite manner in which
he gave his orders. You felt that thus would a well-bred
king send for one of his field marshals. The wine
steward, portly in black, with the silver chain of his
office round his neck, bustled in with the wine list
in his hand. Roy nodded to him with curt familiarity.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Hulloa, Armstrong, we want some of the Liebfraumilch,
the ’21.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Very good, sir.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How’s it holding up? Pretty well? We shan’t
be able to get any more of it, you know.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m afraid not, sir.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, it’s no good meeting trouble halfway, is it,
Armstrong?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy smiled at the steward with breezy cordiality.
The steward saw from his long experience of members
that the remark needed an answer.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, sir.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy laughed and his eye sought mine. Quite a
character, Armstrong.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, chill it, Armstrong; not too much, you
know, but just right. I want my guest to see that we
know what’s what here.” He turned to me. “Armstrong’s
been with us for eight and forty years.”
And when the wine steward had left us: “I hope you
don’t mind coming here. It’s quiet and we can have
a good talk. It’s ages since we did. You’re looking
very fit.”</p>

<p class="pindent">This drew my attention to Roy’s appearance.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not half so fit as you,” I answered.</p>

<p class="pindent">“The result of an upright, sober, and godly life,”
he laughed. “Plenty of work. Plenty of exercise.
How’s the golf? We must have a game one of these
days.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I knew that Roy was scratch and that nothing
would please him less than to waste a day with so
indifferent a player as myself. But I felt I was quite
safe in accepting so vague an invitation. He looked
the picture of health. His curly hair was getting very
gray, but it suited him and made his frank, sunburned
face look younger. His eyes, which looked
upon the world with such a hearty candour, were
bright and clear. He was not so slim as in his youth
and I was not surprised that when the waiter offered
us rolls he asked for Rye-Vita. His slight corpulence
only added to his dignity. It gave weight to his observations.
Because his movements were a little more
deliberate than they had been you had a comfortable
feeling of confidence in him; he filled his chair
with so much solidity that you had almost the impression
that he sat upon a monument.</p>

<p class="pindent">I do not know whether, as I wished, I have indicated
by my report of his dialogue with the waiter
that his conversation was not as a rule brilliant or
witty, but it was easy and he laughed so much that
you sometimes had the illusion that what he said
was funny. He was never at a loss for a remark
and he could discourse on the topics of the day with
an ease that prevented his hearers from experiencing
any sense of strain.</p>

<p class="pindent">Many authors from their preoccupation with words
have the bad habit of choosing those they use in conversation
too carefully. They form their sentences
with unconscious care and say neither more nor less
than they mean. It makes intercourse with them somewhat
formidable to persons in the upper ranks of
society whose vocabulary is limited by their simple
spiritual needs, and their company consequently is
sought only with hesitation. No constraint of this sort
was ever felt with Roy. He could talk with a dancing
guardee in terms that were perfectly comprehensible
to him and with a racing countess in the language of
her stable boys. They said of him with enthusiasm
and relief that he was not a bit like an author. No
compliment pleased him better. The wise always use
a number of ready-made phrases (at the moment I
write “nobody’s business” is the most common), popular
adjectives (like “divine” or “shy-making”),
verbs that you only know the meaning of if you live
in the right set (like “dunch”), which give ease and
a homely sparkle to small talk and avoid the necessity
of thought. The Americans, who are the most efficient
people on the earth, have carried this device
to such a height of perfection and have invented
so wide a range of pithy and hackneyed phrases
that they can carry on an amusing and animated conversation
without giving a moment’s reflection to
what they are saying and so leave their minds free
to consider the more important matters of big business
and fornication. Roy’s repertory was extensive
and his scent for the word of the minute unerring; it
peppered his speech, but aptly, and he used it each
time with a sort of bright eagerness, as though his
fertile brain had just minted it.</p>

<p class="pindent">Now he talked of this and that, of our common
friends and the latest books, of the opera. He was
very breezy. He was always cordial, but to-day his
cordiality took my breath away. He lamented that
we saw one another so seldom and told me with the
frankness that was one of his pleasantest characteristics
how much he liked me and what a high opinion
he had of me. I felt I must not fail to meet this
friendliness halfway. He asked me about the book
I was writing, I asked him about the book he was
writing. We told one another that neither of us had
had the success he deserved. We ate the veal-and-ham
pie and Roy told me how he mixed a salad. We drank
the hock and smacked appreciative lips.</p>

<p class="pindent">And I wondered when he was coming to the point.</p>

<p class="pindent">I could not bring myself to believe that at the
height of the London season Alroy Kear would
waste an hour on a fellow writer who was not a
reviewer and had no influence in any quarter whatever
in order to talk of Matisse, the Russian Ballet
and Marcel Proust. Besides, at the back of his gaiety
I vaguely felt a slight apprehension. Had I not
known that he was in a prosperous state I should
have suspected that he was going to borrow a hundred
pounds from me. It began to look as though luncheon
would end without his finding the opportunity to say
what he had in mind. I knew he was cautious. Perhaps
he thought that this meeting, the first after so
long a separation, had better be employed in establishing
friendly relations, and was prepared to look
upon the pleasant, substantial meal merely as ground
bait.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Shall we go and have our coffee in the next
room?” he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“If you like.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think it’s more comfortable.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I followed him into another room, much more
spacious, with great leather armchairs and huge
sofas; there were papers and magazines on the
tables. Two old gentlemen in a corner were talking
in undertones. They gave us a hostile glance, but this
did not deter Roy from offering them a cordial
greeting.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Hullo, General,” he cried, nodding breezily.</p>

<p class="pindent">I stood for a moment at the window, looking at
the gaiety of the day, and wished I knew more of
the historical associations of St. James’s Street. I
was ashamed that I did not even know the name of
the club across the way and was afraid to ask Roy
lest he should despise me for not knowing what every
decent person knew. He called me back by asking
me whether I would have a brandy with my coffee,
and when I refused, insisted. The club’s brandy was
famous. We sat side by side on a sofa by the elegant
fireplace and lit cigars.</p>

<p class="pindent">“The last time Edward Driffield ever came to
London he lunched with me here,” said Roy casually.
“I made the old man try our brandy and he
was delighted with it. I was staying with his widow
over last week-end.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Were you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She sent you all sorts of messages.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s very kind of her. I shouldn’t have thought
she remembered me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes, she does. You lunched there about six
years ago, didn’t you? She says the old man was so
glad to see you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I didn’t think <span class="it">she</span> was.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, you’re quite wrong. Of course she had to be
very careful. The old man was pestered with people
who wanted to see him and she had to husband his
strength. She was always afraid he’d do too much.
It’s a wonderful thing if you come to think of it that
she should have kept him alive and in possession of
all his faculties to the age of eighty-four. I’ve been
seeing a good deal of her since he died. She’s awfully
lonely. After all, she devoted herself to looking after
him for twenty-five years. Othello’s occupation, you
know. I really feel sorry for her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She’s still comparatively young. I dare say she’ll
marry again.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no, she couldn’t do that. That would be
dreadful.”</p>

<p class="pindent">There was a slight pause while we sipped our
brandy.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You must be one of the few persons still alive
who knew Driffield when he was unknown. You saw
quite a lot of him at one time, didn’t you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“A certain amount. I was almost a small boy and
he was a middle-aged man. We weren’t boon companions,
you know.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Perhaps not, but you must know a great deal
about him that other people don’t.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose I do.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Have you ever thought of writing your recollections
of him?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good heavens, no!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you think you ought to? He was one of
the greatest novelists of our day. The last of the
Victorians. He was an enormous figure. His novels
have as good a chance of surviving as any that have
been written in the last hundred years.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wonder. I’ve always thought them rather boring.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy looked at me with eyes twinkling with laughter.</p>

<p class="pindent">“How like you that is! Anyhow you must admit
that you’re in the minority. I don’t mind telling you
that I’ve read his novels not once or twice, but half
a dozen times, and every time I read them I think
they’re finer. Did you read the articles that were
written about him at his death?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Some of them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The consensus of opinion was absolutely amazing. I read every one.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“If they all said the same thing, wasn’t that rather
unnecessary?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy shrugged his massive shoulders good-humouredly, but did not answer my
question.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I thought the <span class="it">Times Lit. Sup.</span> was splendid. It
would have done the old man good to read it. I hear
that the quarterlies are going to have articles in their
next numbers.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I still think his novels rather boring.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy smiled indulgently.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Doesn’t it make you slightly uneasy to think that
you disagree with everyone whose opinion matters?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not particularly. I’ve been writing for thirty-five
years now, and you can’t think how many geniuses
I’ve seen acclaimed, enjoy their hour or two of glory,
and vanish into obscurity. I wonder what’s happened
to them. Are they dead, are they shut up in madhouses,
are they hidden away in offices? I wonder if
they furtively lend their books to the doctor and the
maiden lady in some obscure village. I wonder if they
are still great men in some Italian pension.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes, they’re the flash in the pans. I’ve known
them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’ve even lectured about them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“One has to. One wants to give them a leg up if
one can and one knows they won’t amount to anything.
Hang it all, one can afford to be generous.
But after all, Driffield wasn’t anything like that. The
collected edition of his works is in thirty-seven volumes
and the last set that came up at Sotheby’s sold
for seventy-eight pounds. That speaks for itself. His
sales have increased steadily every year and last year
was the best he ever had. You can take my word for
that. Mrs. Driffield showed me his accounts last time
I was down there. Driffield has come to stay all right.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Who can tell?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, you think you can,” replied Roy acidly.</p>

<p class="pindent">I was not put out. I knew I was irritating him
and it gave me a pleasant sensation.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think the instinctive judgments I formed when
I was a boy were right. They told me Carlyle was a
great writer and I was ashamed that I found the
<span class="it">French Revolution</span> and <span class="it">Sartor Resartus</span> unreadable.
Can anyone read them now? I thought the opinions
of others must be better than mine and I persuaded
myself that I thought George Meredith magnificent.
In my heart I found him affected, verbose, and insincere.
A good many people think so too now. Because
they told me that to admire Walter Pater was
to prove myself a cultured young man, I admired
Walter Pater, but heavens how Marius bored me!”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, well, I don’t suppose anyone reads Pater
now, and of course Meredith has gone all to pot
and Carlyle was a pretentious windbag.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You don’t know how secure of immortality they
all looked thirty years ago.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And have you never made mistakes?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“One or two. I didn’t think half as much of Newman
as I do now, and I thought a great deal more
of the tinkling quatrains of Fitzgerald. I could not
read Goethe’s <span class="it">Wilhelm Meister</span>; now I think it his
masterpiece.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And what did you think much of then that you
think much of still?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, <span class="it">Tristram Shandy</span> and <span class="it">Amelia</span> and <span class="it">Vanity
Fair</span>. <span class="it">Madame Bovary</span>, <span class="it">La Chartreuse de Parme</span>,
and <span class="it">Anna Karenina</span>. And Wordsworth and Keats
and Verlaine.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“If you don’t mind my saying so, I don’t think
that’s particularly original.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t mind your saying so at all. I don’t think
it is. But you asked me why I believed in my own
judgment, and I was trying to explain to you that,
whatever I said out of timidity and in deference
to the cultured opinion of the day, I didn’t really
admire certain authors who were then thought admirable
and the event seems to show that I was
right. And what I honestly and instinctively liked
then has stood the test of time with me and with
critical opinion in general.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy was silent for a moment. He looked in the
bottom of his cup, but whether to see if there were
any more coffee in it or to find something to say, I
did not know. I gave the clock on the chimney-piece
a glance. In a minute it would be fitting for me to
take my leave. Perhaps I had been wrong and Roy
had invited me only that we might idly chat of
Shakespeare and the musical glasses. I chid myself
for the uncharitable thoughts I had had of him. I
looked at him with concern. If that was his only
object it must be that he was feeling tired or discouraged.
If he was disinterested it could only be
that for the moment at least the world was too much
for him. But he caught my look at the clock and
spoke.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t see how you can deny that there must be
something in a man who’s able to carry on for sixty
years, writing book after book, and who’s able to
hold an ever-increasing public. After all, at Ferne
Court there are shelves filled with the translations
of Driffield’s books into every language of civilized
people. Of course I’m willing to admit that a lot he
wrote seems a bit old-fashioned nowadays. He flourished
in a bad period and he was inclined to be long-winded.
Most of his plots are melodramatic; but
there’s one quality you must allow him: beauty.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes?” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“When all’s said and done, that’s the only thing
that counts and Driffield never wrote a page that
wasn’t instinct with beauty.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes?” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wish you’d been there when we went down to
present him with his portrait on his eightieth birthday.
It really was a memorable occasion.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I read about it in the papers.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It wasn’t only writers, you know, it was a thoroughly
representative gathering—science, politics,
business, art, the world; I think you’d have to go a
long way to find gathered together such a collection
of distinguished people as got out from that train
at Blackstable. It was awfully moving when the P.M.
presented the old man with the Order of Merit. He
made a charming speech. I don’t mind telling you
there were tears in a good many eyes that day.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Did Driffield cry?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, he was singularly calm. He was like he
always was, rather shy, you know, and quiet, very
well-mannered, grateful, of course, but a little dry.
Mrs. Driffield didn’t want him to get overtired and
when we went into lunch he stayed in his study, and
she sent him something in on a tray. I slipped away
while the others were having their coffee. He was
smoking his pipe and looking at the portrait. I asked
him what he thought of it. He wouldn’t tell me, he
just smiled a little. He asked me if I thought he
could take his teeth out and I said, No, the deputation
would be coming in presently to say good-bye
to him. Then I asked him if he didn’t think it was a
wonderful moment. ‘Rum,’ he said, ‘very rum.’ The
fact is, I suppose, he was shattered. He was a messy
eater in his later days and a messy smoker—he scattered
the tobacco all over himself when he filled his
pipe; Mrs. Driffield didn’t like people to see him
when he was like that, but of course she didn’t mind
me; I tidied him up a bit and then they all came in
and shook hands with him, and we went back to
town.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I got up.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I really must be going. It’s been awfully
nice seeing you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m just going along to the private view at the
Leicester Galleries. I know the people there. I’ll take
you in if you like.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s very kind of you, but they sent me a card.
No, I don’t think I’ll come.”</p>

<p class="pindent">We walked down the stairs and I got my hat.
When we came out into the street and I turned to
ward Piccadilly, Roy said:</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll just walk up to the top with you.” He got
into step with me. “You knew his first wife, didn’t
you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Whose?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Driffield’s.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh!” I had forgotten him. “Yes.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Fairly.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose she was awful.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t recollect that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She must have been dreadfully common. She was
a barmaid, wasn’t she?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wonder why the devil he married her. I’ve
always been given to understand that she was extremely
unfaithful to him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Extremely.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do you remember at all what she was like?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, very distinctly,” I smiled. “She was sweet.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy gave a short laugh.</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s not the general impression.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I did not answer. We had reached Piccadilly, and
stopping I held out my hand to Roy. He shook it,
but I fancied without his usual heartiness. I had
the impression that he was disappointed with our
meeting. I could not imagine why. Whatever he had
wanted of me I had not been able to do, for the
reason that he had given me no inkling of what it
was, and as I strolled under the arcade of the Ritz
Hotel and along the park railings till I came opposite
Half Moon Street I wondered if my manner
had been more than ordinarily forbidding. It was
quite evident that Roy had felt the moment inopportune
to ask me to grant him a favour.</p>

<p class="pindent">I walked up Half Moon Street. After the gay
tumult of Piccadilly it had a pleasant silence. It was
sedate and respectable. Most of the houses let
apartments, but this was not advertised by the vulgarity
of a card; some had a brightly polished brass
plate, like a doctor’s, to announce the fact and others
the word <span class="it">Apartments</span> neatly painted on the fanlight.
One or two with an added discretion merely gave
the name of the proprietor, so that if you were
ignorant you might have thought it a tailor’s or a
money lender’s. There was none of the congested
traffic of Jermyn Street, where also they let rooms,
but here and there a smart car, unattended, stood
outside a door and occasionally at another a taxi
deposited a middle-aged lady. You had the feeling
that the people who lodged here were not gay and
a trifle disreputable as in Jermyn Street, racing men
who rose in the morning with headaches and asked
for a hair of the dog that bit them, but respectable
women from the country who came up for six weeks
for the London season and elderly gentlemen who
belonged to exclusive clubs. You felt that they came
year after year to the same house and perhaps had
known the proprietor when he was still in private
service. My own Miss Fellows had been cook in
some very good places, but you would never have
guessed it had you seen her walking along to do her
shopping in Shepherd’s Market. She was not stout,
red-faced, and blousy as one expects a cook to be;
she was spare and very upright, neatly but fashionably
dressed, a woman of middle age, with determined
features; her lips were rouged and she
wore an eyeglass. She was businesslike, quiet, coolly
cynical, and very expensive.</p>

<p class="pindent">The rooms I occupied were on the ground floor.
The parlour was papered with an old marbled paper
and on the walls were water colours of romantic
scenes, cavaliers bidding good-bye to their ladies and
knights of old banqueting in stately halls; there
were large ferns in pots, and the armchairs were
covered with faded leather. There was about the
room an amusing air of the eighteen eighties, and
when I looked out of the window I expected to see
a private hansom rather than a Chrysler. The curtains
were of a heavy red rep.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">III</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">I had</span> a good deal to do that afternoon, but my
conversation with Roy and the impression of the day
before yesterday, the sense of a past that still dwelt
in the minds of men not yet old, that my room, I
could not tell why, had given me even more strongly
than usual as I entered it, inveigled my thoughts to
saunter down the road of memory. It was as though
all the people who had at one time and another inhabited
my lodging pressed upon me with their old-fashioned
ways and odd clothes, men with muttonchop
whiskers in frock coats and women in bustles
and flounced skirts. The rumble of London, which I
did not know if I imagined or heard (my house was
at the top of Half Moon Street), and the beauty
of the sunny June day (<span class="it">le vierge, le vivace et le bel
aujourd’hui</span>), gave my reverie a poignancy which
was not quite painful. The past I looked at seemed
to have lost its reality and I saw it as though it
were a scene in a play and I a spectator in the back
row of a dark gallery. But it was all very clear as
far as it went. It was not misty like life as one leads
it when the ceaseless throng of impressions seems to
rob them of outline, but sharp and definite like a
landscape painted in oils by a painstaking artist of
the middle-Victorian era.</p>

<p class="pindent">I fancy that life is more amusing now than it was
forty years ago and I have a notion that people are
more amiable. They may have been worthier then,
possessed of more solid virtue as, I am told, they
were possessed of more substantial knowledge; I do
not know. I know they were more cantankerous;
they ate too much, many of them drank too much,
they took too little exercise. Their livers were out
of order and their digestions often impaired. They
were irritable. I do not speak of London of which
I knew nothing till I was grown up, nor of grand
people who hunted and shot, but of the countryside
and of the modest persons, gentlemen of small
means, clergymen, retired officers, and such like
who made up the local society. The dullness of their
lives was almost incredible. There were no golf
links; at a few houses was an ill-kept tennis court,
but it was only the very young who played; there was
a dance once a year in the Assembly Rooms; carriage
folk went for a drive in the afternoon; the
others went for a “constitutional!” You may say
that they did not miss amusements they had never
thought of, and that they created excitement for
themselves from the small entertainment (tea when
you were asked to bring your music and you sang
the songs of Maude Valérie White and Tosti) which
at infrequent intervals they offered one another; the
days were very long; they were bored. People who
were condemned to spend their lives within a mile of
one another quarrelled bitterly, and seeing each
other every day in the town cut one another for
twenty years. They were vain, pig-headed, and odd.
It was a life that perhaps formed queer characters;
people were not so like one another as now and they
acquired a small celebrity by their idiosyncrasies, but
they were not easy to get on with. It may be that we
are flippant and careless, but we accept one another
without the old suspicion; our manners, rough and
ready, are kindly; we are more prepared to give and
take and we are not so crabbed.</p>

<p class="pindent">I lived with an uncle and aunt on the outskirts of
a little Kentish town by the sea. It was called Blackstable
and my uncle was the vicar. My aunt was a
German. She came of a very noble but impoverished
family, and the only portion she brought her husband
was a marquetry writing desk, made for an ancestor
in the Seventeenth Century, and a set of tumblers.
Of these only a few remained when I entered upon
the scene and they were used as ornaments in the
drawing room. I liked the grand coat-of-arms with
which they were heavily engraved. There were I
don’t know how many quarterings, which my aunt
used demurely to explain to me, and the supporters
were fine and the crest emerging from a crown incredibly
romantic. She was a simple old lady, of a
meek and Christian disposition, but she had not,
though married for more than thirty years to a
modest parson with very little income beyond his
stipend, forgotten that she was <span class="it">hochwohlgeboren</span>.
When a rich banker from London, with a name that
in these days is famous in financial circles, took a
neighbouring house for the summer holidays, though
my uncle called on him (chiefly, I surmise, to get a
subscription to the Additional Curates Society), she
refused to do so because he was in trade. No one
thought her a snob. It was accepted as perfectly
reasonable. The banker had a little boy of my own
age, and, I forget how, I became acquainted with
him. I still remember the discussion that ensued
when I asked if I might bring him to the vicarage;
permission was reluctantly given me, but I was not
allowed to go in return to his house. My aunt said
I’d be wanting to go to the coal merchant’s next, and
my uncle said:</p>

<p class="pindent">“Evil communications corrupt good manners.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The banker used to come to church every Sunday
morning, and he always put half a sovereign in the
plate, but if he thought his generosity made a good
impression he was much mistaken. All Blackstable
knew, but only thought him purse-proud.</p>

<p class="pindent">Blackstable consisted of a long winding street that
led to the sea, with little two-story houses, many of
them residential but with a good many shops; and
from this ran a certain number of short streets, recently
built, that ended on one side in the country
and on the other in the marshes. Round about the
harbour was a congeries of narrow winding alleys.
Colliers brought coal from Newcastle to Blackstable
and the harbour was animated. When I was old
enough to be allowed out by myself I used to spend
hours wandering about there looking at the rough
grimy men in their jerseys and watching the coal
being unloaded.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was at Blackstable that I first met Edward
Driffield. I was fifteen and had just come back from
school for the summer holidays. The morning after
I got home I took a towel and bathing drawers and
went down to the beach. The sky was unclouded and
the air hot and bright, but the North Sea gave
it a pleasant tang so that it was a delight just to
live and breathe. In winter the natives of Blackstable
walked down the empty street with a hurried
gait, screwing themselves up in order to expose as
little surface as possible to the bitterness of the
east wind, but now they dawdled; they stood about
in groups in the space between the Duke of Kent and
the Bear and Key. You heard a hum of their East
Anglian speech, drawling a little with an accent that
may be ugly, but in which from old association I still
find a leisurely charm. They were fresh-complexioned,
with blue eyes and high cheek bones, and their hair
was light. They had a clean, honest, and ingenuous
look. I do not think they were very intelligent, but
they were guileless. They looked healthy, and though
not tall for the most part were strong and active.
There was little wheeled traffic in Blackstable in
those days and the groups that stood about the road
chatting seldom had to move for anything but the
doctor’s dogcart or the baker’s trap.</p>

<p class="pindent">Passing the bank, I called in to say how-do-you-do
to the manager, who was my uncle’s churchwarden,
and when I came out met my uncle’s curate. He
stopped and shook hands with me. He was walking
with a stranger. He did not introduce me to him. He
was a smallish man with a beard and he was dressed
rather loudly in a bright brown knickerbocker suit, the
breeches very tight, with navy blue stockings, black
boots, and a billycock hat. Knickerbockers were uncommon
then, at least in Blackstable, and being young
and fresh from school I immediately set the fellow
down as a cad. But while I chatted with the curate
he looked at me in a friendly way, with a smile in his
pale blue eyes. I felt that for two pins he would have
joined in the conversation and I assumed a haughty
demeanour. I was not going to run the risk of being
spoken to by a chap who wore knickerbockers like a
gamekeeper and I resented the familiarity of his good-humoured
expression. I was myself faultlessly dressed
in white flannel trousers, a blue blazer with the arms
of my school on the breast pocket, and a black-and-white
straw hat with a very wide brim. The curate
said that he must be getting on (fortunately, for I
never knew how to break away from a meeting in the
street and would endure agonies of shyness while I
looked in vain for an opportunity), but said that he
would be coming up to the vicarage that afternoon
and would I tell my uncle. The stranger nodded and
smiled as we parted, but I gave him a stony stare.
I supposed he was a summer visitor and in Blackstable
we did not mix with the summer visitors. We
thought London people vulgar. We said it was
horrid to have all that rag-tag and bobtail down
from town every year, but of course it was all right
for the tradespeople. Even they, however, gave a
faint sigh of relief when September came to an end
and Blackstable sank back into its usual peace.</p>

<p class="pindent">When I went home to dinner, my hair insufficiently
dried and clinging lankily to my head, I remarked
that I had met the curate and he was coming up that
afternoon.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Old Mrs. Shepherd died last night,” said my
uncle in explanation.</p>

<p class="pindent">The curate’s name was Galloway; he was a tall
thin ungainly man with untidy black hair and a small
sallow dark face. I suppose he was quite young, but
to me he seemed middle-aged. He talked very quickly
and gesticulated a great deal. This made people
think him rather queer and my uncle would not have
kept him but that he was very energetic, and my
uncle, being extremely lazy, was glad to have someone
to take so much work off his shoulders. After
he had finished the business that had brought him
to the vicarage Mr. Galloway came in to say how-do-you-do
to my aunt and she asked him to stay
to tea.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Who was that you were with this morning?” I
asked him as he sat down.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, that was Edward Driffield. I didn’t introduce
him. I wasn’t sure if your uncle would wish you to
know him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think it would be most undesirable,” said my
uncle.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, who is he? He’s not a Blackstable man,
is he?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He was born in the parish,” said my uncle. “His
father was old Miss Wolfe’s bailiff at Ferne Court.
But they were chapel people.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He married a Blackstable girl,” said Mr. Galloway.</p>

<p class="pindent">“In church, I believe,” said my aunt. “Is it true
that she was a barmaid at the Railway Arms?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She looks as if she might have been something
like that,” said Mr. Galloway, with a smile.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Are they going to stay long?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I think so. They’ve taken one of those houses
in that street where the Congregational chapel is,”
said the curate.</p>

<p class="pindent">At that time in Blackstable, though the new
streets doubtless had names, nobody knew or used
them.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Is he coming to church?” asked my uncle.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I haven’t actually talked to him about it yet,”
answered Mr. Galloway. “He’s quite an educated
man, you know.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I can hardly believe that,” said my uncle.</p>

<p class="pindent">“He was at Haversham School, I understand, and
he got any number of scholarships and prizes. He
got a scholarship at Wadham, but he ran away to
sea instead.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’d heard he was rather a harum-scarum,” said
my uncle.</p>

<p class="pindent">“He doesn’t look much like a sailor,” I remarked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, he gave up the sea many years ago. He’s been
all sorts of things since then.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Jack of all trades and master of none,” said
my uncle.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Now, I understand, he’s a writer.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That won’t last long,” said my uncle.</p>

<p class="pindent">I had never known a writer before; I was interested.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What does he write?” I asked. “Books?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I believe so,” said the curate, “and articles. He
had a novel published last spring. He’s promised to
lend it me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wouldn’t waste my time on rubbish in your
place,” said my uncle, who never read anything but
the <span class="it">Times</span> and the <span class="it">Guardian</span>.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What’s it called?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“He told me the title, but I forget it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Anyhow, it’s quite unnecessary that you should
know,” said my uncle. “I should very much object
to your reading trashy novels. During your holidays
the best thing you can do is to keep out in the open
air. And you have a holiday task, I presume?”</p>

<p class="pindent">I had. It was <span class="it">Ivanhoe</span>. I had read it when I was
ten, and the notion of reading it again and writing
an essay on it bored me to distraction.</p>

<p class="pindent">When I consider the greatness that Edward Driffield
afterward achieved I cannot but smile as I remember
the fashion in which he was discussed at my
uncle’s table. When he died a little while ago and an
agitation arose among his admirers to have him
buried in Westminster Abbey the present incumbent
at Blackstable, my uncle’s successor twice removed,
wrote to the <span class="it">Daily Mail</span> pointing out that Driffield
was born in the parish and not only had passed long
years, especially the last twenty-five of his life, in the
neighbourhood, but had laid there the scene of some
of his most famous books; it was only becoming then
that his bones should rest in the churchyard where
under the Kentish elms his father and mother dwelt
in peace. There was relief in Blackstable when, the
Dean of Westminster having somewhat curtly refused
the Abbey, Mrs. Driffield sent a dignified letter
to the press in which she expressed her confidence
that she was carrying out the dearest wishes of her
dead husband in having him buried among the simple
people he knew and loved so well. Unless the notabilities
of Blackstable have very much changed since
my day I do not believe they very much liked that
phrase about “simple people,” but, as I afterward
learnt, they had never been able to “abide” the second
Mrs. Driffield.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">IV</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">To my</span> surprise, two or three days after I lunched
with Alroy Kear I received a letter from Edward
Driffield’s widow. It ran as follows:</p>

<div class="blockquote100percent">

<p class="hang"><span class="sc">Dear Friend</span>,<br />
<span class="it">I hear that you had a long talk with Roy last week
about Edward Driffield and I am so glad to know that
you spoke of him so nicely. He often talked to me of
you. He had the greatest admiration for your talent and
he was so very pleased to see you when you came to lunch
with us. I wonder if you have in your possession any
letters that he wrote to you and if so whether you would
let me have copies of them. I should be very pleased if
I could persuade you to come down for two or three
days and stay with me. I live very quietly now and have
no one here, so please choose your own time. I shall be
delighted to see you again and have a talk of old times.
I have a particular service I want you to do me and I
am sure that for the sake of my dear dead husband you
will not refuse.</span></p>

<p class="line0" style="text-align:right;margin-right:2em;"><span class="it">Yours ever sincerely</span>,</p>
<p class="line0" style="text-align:right;margin-right:1em;"><span class="sc">Amy Driffield</span>.</p>

</div>

<p class="pindent">I had seen Mrs. Driffield only once and she but
mildly interested me; I do not like being addressed as
“dear friend”; that alone would have been enough to
make me decline her invitation; and I was exasperated
by its general character which, however ingenious
an excuse I invented, made the reason I did not
go quite obvious, namely, that I did not want to. I
had no letters of Driffield’s. I suppose years ago he
had written to me several times, brief notes, but he
was then an obscure scribbler and even if I ever kept
letters it would never have occurred to me to keep
his. How was I to know that he was going to be
acclaimed as the greatest novelist of our day? I hesitated
only because Mrs. Driffield said she wanted me
to do something for her. It would certainly be a
nuisance, but it would be churlish not to do it if I
could, and after all her husband was a very distinguished man.</p>

<p class="pindent">The letter came by the first post and after breakfast
I rang up Roy. As soon as I mentioned my name
I was put through to him by his secretary. If I were
writing a detective story I should immediately have
suspected that my call was awaited, and Roy’s virile
voice calling hullo would have confirmed my suspicion.
No one could naturally be quite so cheery so
early in the morning.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hope I didn’t wake you,” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good God, no.” His healthy laugh rippled along
the wires. “I’ve been up since seven. I’ve been riding
in the park. I’m just going to have breakfast. Come
along and have it with me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I have a great affection for you, Roy,” I answered,
“but I don’t think you’re the sort of person I’d care
to have breakfast with. Besides, I’ve already had
mine. Look here, I’ve just had a letter from Mrs.
Driffield asking me to go down and stay.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, she told me she was going to ask you. We
might go down together. She’s got quite a good
grass court and she does one very well. I think you’d
like it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What is it that she wants me to do?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ah, I think she’d like to tell you that herself.”</p>

<p class="pindent">There was a softness in Roy’s voice such as I
imagined he would use if he were telling a prospective
father that his wife was about to gratify his wishes.
It cut no ice with me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Come off it, Roy,” I said. “I’m too old a bird
to be caught with chaff. Spit it out.”</p>

<p class="pindent">There was a moment’s pause at the other end of
the telephone. I felt that Roy did not like my expression.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Are you busy this morning?” he asked suddenly.
“I’d like to come and see you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right, come on. I shall be in till one.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll be round in about an hour.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I replaced the receiver and relit my pipe. I gave
Mrs. Driffield’s letter a second glance.</p>

<p class="pindent">I remembered vividly the luncheon to which she
referred. I happened to be staying for a long week-end
not far from Tercanbury with a certain Lady
Hodmarsh, the clever and handsome American wife
of a sporting baronet with no intelligence and charming
manners. Perhaps to relieve the tedium of domestic
life she was in the habit of entertaining persons
connected with the arts. Her parties were mixed and
gay. Members of the nobility and gentry mingled
with astonishment and an uneasy awe with painters,
writers, and actors. Lady Hodmarsh neither read the
books nor looked at the pictures of the people to
whom she offered hospitality, but she liked their company
and enjoyed the feeling it gave her of being in the
artistic know. When on this occasion the conversation
happened to dwell for a moment on Edward Driffield,
her most celebrated neighbour, and I mentioned
that I had at one time known him very well
she proposed that we should go over and lunch with
him on Monday when a number of her guests were
going back to London. I demurred, for I had not
seen Driffield for five and thirty years and I could
not believe that he would remember me; and if he
did (though this I kept to myself) I could not believe
that it would be with pleasure. But there was
a young peer there, a certain Lord Scallion, with
literary inclinations so violent that, instead of ruling
this country as the laws of man and nature have
decreed, he devoted his energy to the composition
of detective novels. His curiosity to see Driffield was
boundless and the moment Lady Hodmarsh made her
suggestion he said it would be too divine. The star
guest of the party was a big young fat duchess and
it appeared that her admiration for the celebrated
writer was so intense that she was prepared to cut
an engagement in London and not go up till the
afternoon.</p>

<p class="pindent">“That would make four of us,” said Lady Hodmarsh.
“I don’t think they could manage more than
that. I’ll wire to Mrs. Driffield at once.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I could not see myself going to see Driffield in
that company and tried to throw cold water on the
scheme.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’ll only bore him to death,” I said. “He’ll hate
having a lot of strangers barging in on him like this.
He’s a very old man.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s why if they want to see him they’d better
see him now. He can’t last much longer. Mrs. Driffield
says he likes to meet people. They never see
anybody but the doctor and the parson and it’s a
change for them. Mrs. Driffield said I could always
bring anyone interesting. Of course she has to be
very careful. He’s pestered by all sorts of people
who want to see him just out of idle curiosity, and
interviewers and authors who want him to read their
books, and silly hysterical women. But Mrs. Driffield
is wonderful. She keeps everyone away from
him but those she thinks he ought to see. I mean,
he’d be dead in a week if he saw everyone who wants
to see him. She has to think of his strength. Naturally
we’re different.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Of course I thought I was; but as I looked at them
I perceived that the duchess and Lord Scallion
thought they were too; so it seemed best to say no
more.</p>

<p class="pindent">We drove over in a bright yellow Rolls. Ferne
Court was three miles from Blackstable. It was a
stucco house built, I suppose, about 1840, plain and
unpretentious, but substantial; it was the same back
and front, two large bows on each side of a flat
piece in which was the front door, and there were two
large bows on the first floor. A plain parapet hid the
low roof. It stood in about an acre of garden, somewhat
overgrown with trees, but neatly tended, and
from the drawing room window you had a pleasant
view of woods and green downland. The drawing
room was furnished so exactly as you felt a drawing
room in a country house of modest size should be
furnished that it was slightly disconcerting. Clean
bright chintzes covered the comfortable chairs and
the large sofa, and the curtains were of the same
bright clean chintz. On little Chippendale tables stood
large Oriental bowls filled with pot-pourri. On the
cream-coloured walls were pleasant water colours by
painters well known at the beginning of this century.
There were great masses of flowers charmingly
arranged, and on the grand piano in silver frames
photographs of celebrated actresses, deceased authors,
and minor royalties.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was no wonder that the duchess cried out that
it was a lovely room. It was just the kind of room
in which a distinguished writer should spend the
evening of his days. Mrs. Driffield received us with
modest assurance. She was a woman of about five
and forty, I judged, with a small sallow face and
neat, sharp features. She had a black cloche hat
pressed tight down on her head and wore a gray
coat and skirt. Her figure was slight and she was
neither tall nor short, and she looked trim, competent,
and alert. She might have been the squire’s
widowed daughter, who ran the parish and had a
peculiar gift for organization. She introduced us to
a clergyman and a lady, who got up as we were
shown in. They were the Vicar of Blackstable and
his wife. Lady Hodmarsh and the duchess immediately
assumed that cringing affability that persons
of rank assume with their inferiors in order to show
them that they are not for a moment aware that
there is any difference of station between them.</p>

<p class="pindent">Then Edward Driffield came in. I had seen portraits
of him from time to time in the illustrated
papers but it was with dismay that I saw him in the
flesh. He was smaller than I remembered and very
thin, his head was barely covered with fine silvery
hair, he was clean-shaven, and his skin was almost
transparent. His blue eyes were very pale and the
rims of his eyelids red. He looked an old, old man,
hanging on to mortality by a thread; he wore very
white false teeth and they made his smile seem
forced and stiff. I had never seen him but bearded
and his lips were thin and pallid. He was dressed in
a new, well-cut suit of blue serge and his low collar,
two or three sizes too large for him, showed a
wrinkled, scraggy neck. He wore a neat black tie
with a pearl in it. He looked a little like a dean in
mufti on his summer holiday in Switzerland.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Driffield gave him a quick glance as he came
in and smiled encouragingly; she must have been satisfied
with the neatness of his appearance. He shook
hands with his guests and to each one said something
civil. When he came to me he said:</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s very good of a busy and successful man like
you to come all this way to see an old fogey.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was a trifle taken aback, for he spoke as though
he had never seen me before, and I was afraid my
friends would think I had been boasting when I
claimed at one time to have known him intimately.
I wondered if he had completely forgotten me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t know how many years it is since we last
met,” I said, trying to be hearty.</p>

<p class="pindent">He looked at me for what I suppose was no more
than a few seconds, but for what seemed to me quite
a long time, and then I had a sudden shock; he gave
me a little wink. It was so quick that nobody but I
could have caught it, and so unexpected in that distinguished
old face that I could hardly believe my
eyes. In a moment his face was once more composed,
intelligently benign, and quietly observant. Luncheon
was announced and we trooped into the dining room.</p>

<p class="pindent">This also was in what can only be described as
the acme of good taste. On the Chippendale sideboard
were silver candlesticks. We sat on Chippendale
chairs and ate off a Chippendale table. In a
silver bowl in the middle were roses and round this
were silver dishes with chocolates in them and peppermint
creams; the silver salt cellars were brightly
polished and evidently Georgian. On the cream-coloured
walls were mezzotints of ladies painted by
Sir Peter Lely and on the chimney-piece a garniture
of blue delft. The service was conducted by two
maids in brown uniform and Mrs. Driffield in the
midst of her fluent conversation kept a wary eye on
them. I wondered how she had managed to train
these buxom Kentish girls (their healthy colour and
high cheek bones betrayed the fact that they were
“local”) to such a pitch of efficiency. The lunch was
just right for the occasion, smart but not showy,
fillets of sole rolled up and covered with a white
sauce, roast chicken, with new potatoes and green
peas, asparagus and gooseberry fool. It was the
dining room and the lunch and the manner which
you felt exactly fitted a literary gent of great celebrity
but moderate wealth.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Driffield, like the wives of most men of letters,
was a great talker and she did not let the conversation
at her end of the table flag; so that, however
much we might have wanted to hear what her
husband was saying at the other, we had no opportunity.
She was gay and sprightly. Though Edward
Driffield’s indifferent health and great age obliged
her to live most of the year in the country, she managed
notwithstanding to run up to town often enough
to keep abreast of what was going on and she was
soon engaged with Lord Scallion in an animated
discussion of the plays in the London theatres and
the terrible crowd at the Royal Academy. It had
taken her two visits to look at all the pictures and
even then she had not had time to see the water
colours. She liked water colours so much; they were
unpretentious; she hated things to be pretentious.</p>

<p class="pindent">So that host and hostess should sit at the head and
foot of the table, the vicar sat next to Lord Scallion
and his wife next to the duchess. The duchess engaged
her in conversation on the subject of working-class
dwellings, a subject on which she seemed to be
much more at home than the parson’s lady, and my attention
being thus set free I watched Edward Driffield.
He was talking to Lady Hodmarsh. She was apparently
telling him how to write a novel and giving
him a list of a few that he really ought to read. He
listened to her with what looked like polite interest,
putting in now and then a remark in a voice too low
for me to catch, and when she made a jest (she made
them frequently and often good ones) he gave a
little chuckle and shot her a quick look that seemed
to say: this woman isn’t such a damned fool after all.
Remembering the past, I asked myself curiously what
he thought of this grand company, his neatly turned
out wife, so competent and discreetly managing, and
the elegant surroundings in which he lived. I wondered
if he regretted his early days of adventure. I
wondered if all this amused him or if the amiable
civility of his manner masked a hideous boredom.
Perhaps he felt my eyes upon him, for he raised his.
They rested on me for a while with a meditative look,
mild and yet oddly scrutinizing, and then suddenly,
unmistakably this time, he gave me another wink.
The frivolous gesture in that old, withered face was
more than startling, it was embarrassing; I did not
know what to do. My lips outlined a dubious smile.</p>

<p class="pindent">But the duchess joining in the conversation at the
head of the table, the vicar’s wife turned to me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You knew him many years ago, didn’t you?” she
asked me in a low tone.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She gave the company a glance to see that no one
was attending to us.</p>

<p class="pindent">“His wife is anxious that you shouldn’t call up
old memories that might be painful to him. He’s very
frail, you know, and the least thing upsets him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll be very careful.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The way she looks after him is simply wonderful.
Her devotion is a lesson to all of us. She realizes
what a precious charge it is. Her unselfishness is
beyond words.” She lowered her voice a little more.
“Of course he’s a very old man and old men sometimes
are a little trying; I’ve never seen her out of
patience. In her way she’s just as wonderful as he is.”</p>

<p class="pindent">These were the sort of remarks to which it was
difficult to find a reply, but I felt that one was expected
of me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Considering everything I think he looks very
well,” I murmured.</p>

<p class="pindent">“He owes it all to her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">At the end of luncheon we went back into the
drawing room and after we had been standing about
for two or three minutes Edward Driffield came up
to me. I was talking with the vicar and for want of
anything better to say was admiring the charming
view. I turned to my host.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I was just saying how picturesque that little row
of cottages is down there.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“From here.” Driffield looked at their broken outline
and an ironic smile curled his thin lips. “I was
born in one of them. Rum, isn’t it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">But Mrs. Driffield came up to us with bustling
geniality. Her voice was brisk and melodious.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, Edward, I’m sure the duchess would like to
see your writing room. She has to go almost immediately.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m so sorry, but I must catch the three-eighteen
from Tercanbury,” said the duchess.</p>

<p class="pindent">We filed into Driffield’s study. It was a large room
on the other side of the house, looking out on the
same view as the dining room, with a bow window.
It was the sort of room that a devoted wife would
evidently arrange for her literary husband. It was
scrupulously tidy and large bowls of flowers gave
it a feminine touch.</p>

<p class="pindent">“This is the desk at which he’s written all his
later works,” said Mrs. Driffield, closing a book
that was open face downward on it. “It’s the frontispiece
in the third volume of the <span class="it">edition de luxe</span>. It’s
a period piece.”</p>

<p class="pindent">We all admired the writing table and Lady Hodmarsh,
when she thought no one was looking, ran
her fingers along its under edge to see if it was
genuine. Mrs. Driffield gave us a quick, bright smile.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Would you like to see one of his manuscripts?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’d love to,” said the duchess, “and then I simply
must bolt.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Driffield took from a shelf a manuscript
bound in blue morocco, and while the rest of the
party reverently examined it I had a look at the
books with which the room was lined. As authors
will, I ran my eye round quickly to see if there were
any of mine, but could not find one; I saw, however,
a complete set of Alroy Kear’s and a great
many novels in bright bindings, which looked suspiciously
unread; I guessed that they were the works
of authors who had sent them to the master in
homage to his talent and perhaps the hope of a few
words of eulogy that could be used in the publisher’s
advertisements. But all the books were so neatly
arranged, they were so clean, that I had the impression
they were very seldom read. There was the
Oxford Dictionary and there were standard editions
in grand bindings of most of the English classics,
Fielding, Boswell, Hazlitt, and so on, and there
were a great many books on the sea; I recognized
the variously coloured, untidy volumes of the sailing
directions issued by the Admiralty, and there were
a number of works on gardening. The room had the
look not of a writer’s workshop, but of a memorial
to a great name, and you could almost see already
the desultory tripper wandering in for want of something
better to do and smell the rather musty,
close smell of a museum that few visited. I had a
suspicion that nowadays if Driffield read anything
at all it was the <span class="it">Gardener’s Chronicle</span> or the <span class="it">Shipping
Gazette</span>, of which I saw a bundle on a table in the
corner.</p>

<p class="pindent">When the ladies had seen all they wanted we bade
our hosts farewell. But Lady Hodmarsh was a
woman of tact and it must have occurred to her that
I, the excuse for the party, had scarcely had a word
with Edward Driffield, for at the door, enveloping
me with a friendly smile, she said to him:</p>

<p class="pindent">“I was so interested to hear that you and Mr.
Ashenden had known one another years and years
ago. Was he a nice little boy?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Driffield looked at me for a moment with that
level, ironic gaze of his. I had the impression that
if there had been nobody there he would have put his
tongue out at me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Shy,” he replied. “I taught him to ride a bicycle.”</p>

<p class="pindent">We got once more into the huge yellow Rolls and
drove off.</p>

<p class="pindent">“He’s too sweet,” said the duchess. “I’m so glad
we went.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He has such nice manners, hasn’t he?” said Lady
Hodmarsh.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You didn’t really expect him to eat his peas with
a knife, did you?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wish he had,” said Scallion. “It would have
been so picturesque.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I believe it’s very difficult,” said the duchess.
“I’ve tried over and over again and I can never get
them to stay on.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You have to spear them,” said Scallion.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not at all,” retorted the duchess. “You have to
balance them on the flat, and they roll like the devil.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What did you think of Mrs. Driffield?” asked
Lady Hodmarsh.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose she serves her purpose,” said the
duchess.</p>

<p class="pindent">“He’s so old, poor darling, he must have someone
to look after him. You know she was a hospital
nurse?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, was she?” said the duchess. “I thought perhaps
she’d been his secretary or typist or something.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She’s quite nice,” said Lady Hodmarsh, warmly
defending a friend.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, quite.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He had a long illness about twenty years ago,
and she was his nurse then, and after he got well he
married her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Funny how men will do that. She must have
been years younger than him. She can’t be more than—what?—forty
or forty-five.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, I shouldn’t think so. Forty-seven, say. I’m
told she’s done a great deal for him. I mean, she’s
made him quite presentable. Alroy Kear told me that
before that he was almost too bohemian.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“As a rule authors’ wives are odious.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s such a bore having to have them, isn’t it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Crushing. I wonder they don’t see that themselves.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Poor wretches, they often suffer from the delusion
that people find them interesting,” I murmured.</p>

<p class="pindent">We reached Tercanbury, dropped the duchess at
the station, and drove on.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">V</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">It was</span> true that Edward Driffield had taught me
to bicycle. That was indeed how I first made his
acquaintance. I do not know how long the safety
bicycle had been invented, but I know that it was
not common in the remote part of Kent in which I
lived and when you saw someone speeding along on
solid tires you turned round and looked till he was
out of sight. It was still a matter for jocularity on
the part of middle-aged gentlemen who said Shank’s
pony was good enough for them, and for trepidation
on the part of elderly ladies who made a dash for
the side of the road when they saw one coming. I
had been for some time filled with envy of the boys
whom I saw riding into the school grounds on their
bicycles, and it gave a pretty opportunity for showing
off when you entered the gateway without holding
on to the handles. I had persuaded my uncle to let
me have one at the beginning of the summer holidays,
and though my aunt was against it, since she
said I should only break my neck, he had yielded to
my pertinacity more willingly because I was of course
paying for it out of my own money. I ordered it
before school broke up and a few days later the carrier
brought it over from Tercanbury.</p>

<p class="pindent">I was determined to learn to ride it by myself and
chaps at school had told me that they had learned
in half an hour. I tried and tried and at last came
to the conclusion that I was abnormally stupid (I
am inclined now to think that I was exaggerating),
but even after my pride was sufficiently humbled for
me to allow the gardener to hold me up I seemed at
the end of the first morning no nearer to being able
to get on by myself than at the beginning. Next day,
however, thinking that the carriage drive at the
vicarage was too winding to give a fellow a proper
chance, I wheeled the bicycle to a road not far away
which I knew was perfectly flat and straight and so
solitary that no one would see me making a fool of
myself. I tried several times to mount, but fell off
each time. I barked my shins against the pedals and
got very hot and bothered. After I had been doing
this for about an hour, though I began to think that
God did not intend me to ride a bicycle, but was determined
(unable to bear the thought of the sarcasms
of my uncle, his representative at Blackstable)
to do so all the same, to my disgust I saw two people
on bicycles coming along the deserted road. I immediately
wheeled my machine to the side and sat down
on a stile, looking out to sea in a nonchalant way as
though I had been for a ride and were just sitting
there wrapped in contemplation of the vasty
ocean. I kept my eyes dreamily averted from the
two persons who were advancing toward me, but I
felt that they were coming nearer, and through the
corner of my eye I saw that they were a man and
a woman. As they passed me the woman swerved
violently to my side of the road and, crashing against
me, fell to the ground.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I’m sorry,” she said. “I knew I should fall
off the moment I saw you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">It was impossible under the circumstances to preserve
my appearance of abstraction and, blushing
furiously, I said that it didn’t matter at all.</p>

<p class="pindent">The man had got off as she fell.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You haven’t hurt yourself?” he asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I recognized him then as Edward Driffield, the
author I had seen walking with the curate a few
days before.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m just learning to ride,” said his companion.
“And I fall off whenever I see anything in the road.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Aren’t you the vicar’s nephew?” said Driffield.
“I saw you the other day. Galloway told me who
you were. This is my wife.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She held out her hand with an oddly frank gesture
and when I took it gave mine a warm and hearty
pressure. She smiled with her lips and with her eyes
and there was in her smile something that even then I
recognized as singularly pleasant. I was confused.
People I did not know made me dreadfully self-conscious,
and I could not take in any of the details
of her appearance. I just had an impression of a
rather large blond woman. I do not know if I noticed
then or only remembered afterward that she wore a
full skirt of blue serge, a pink shirt with a starched
front and a starched collar, and a straw hat, called in
those days, I think, a boater, perched on the top of
a lot of golden hair.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think bicycling’s lovely, don’t you?” she said,
looking at my beautiful new machine which leaned
against the stile. “It must be wonderful to be able
to ride well.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I felt that this inferred an admiration for my proficiency.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s only a matter of practice,” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“This is only my third lesson. Mr. Driffield says
I’m coming on wonderful, but I feel so stupid I could
kick myself. How long did it take you before you
could ride?”</p>

<p class="pindent">I blushed to the roots of my hair. I could hardly
utter the shameful words.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I can’t ride,” I said. “I’ve only just got this bike
and this is the first time I’ve tried.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I equivocated a trifle there, but I made it all right
with my conscience by adding the mental reservation:
except yesterday at home in the garden.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll give you a lesson if you like,” said Driffield
in his good-humoured way. “Come on.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no,” I said. “I wouldn’t dream of it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why not?” asked his wife, her blue eyes still
pleasantly smiling. “Mr. Driffield would like to and
it’ll give me a chance to rest.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Driffield took my bicycle, and I, reluctant but unable
to withstand his friendly violence, clumsily
mounted. I swayed from side to side, but he held me
with a firm hand.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Faster,” he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">I pedalled and he ran by me as I wobbled from
side to side. We were both very hot when, notwithstanding
his struggles, I at last fell off. It was very
hard under such circumstances to preserve the standoffishness
befitting the vicar’s nephew with the son
of Miss Wolfe’s bailiff, and when I started back
again and for thirty or forty thrilling yards actually
rode by myself and Mrs. Driffield ran into the middle
of the road with her arms akimbo shouting, “Go it,
go it, two to one on the favourite,” I was laughing
so much that I positively forgot all about my social
status. I got off of my own accord, my face no doubt
wearing an air of immodest triumph, and received
without embarrassment the Driffields’ congratulation
on my cleverness in riding a bicycle the very first
day I tried.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I want to see if I can get on by myself,” said
Mrs. Driffield, and I sat down again on the stile
while her husband and I watched her unavailing
struggles.</p>

<p class="pindent">Then, wanting to rest again, disappointed but
cheerful, she sat down beside me. Driffield lit his
pipe. We chatted. I did not of course realize it then,
but I know now that there was a disarming frankness
in her manner that put one at one’s ease. She
talked with a kind of eagerness, like a child bubbling
over with the zest of life, and her eyes were lit all
the time by her engaging smile. I did not know why
I liked it. I should say it was a little sly, if slyness
were not a displeasing quality; it was too innocent
to be sly. It was mischievous rather, like that of a
child who has done something that he thinks funny,
but is quite well aware that you will think rather
naughty; he knows all the same that you won’t be
really cross and if you don’t find out about it quickly
he’ll come and tell you himself. But of course then
I only knew that her smile made me feel at home.</p>

<p class="pindent">Presently Driffield, looking at his watch, said that
they must be going and suggested that we should
all ride back together in style. It was just the time
that my aunt and uncle would be coming home from
their daily walk down the town and I did not like to
run the risk of being seen with people whom they
would not at all approve of; so I asked them to go
on first, as they would go more quickly than I. Mrs.
Driffield would not hear of it, but Driffield gave me
a funny, amused little look, which made me think
that he saw through my excuse so that I blushed scarlet,
and he said:</p>

<p class="pindent">“Let him go by himself, Rosie. He can manage
better alone.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right. Shall you be here to-morrow? We’re
coming.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll try to,” I answered.</p>

<p class="pindent">They rode off, and in a few minutes I followed.
Feeling very much pleased with myself, I rode all the
way to the vicarage gates without falling. I think I
boasted a good deal at dinner, but I did not say that
I had met the Driffields.</p>

<p class="pindent">Next day at about eleven I got my bicycle out of
the coachhouse. It was so called though it held not
even a pony trap and was used by the gardener to
keep the mower and the roller, and by Mary-Ann for
her sack of meal for the chickens. I wheeled it down
to the gate and, mounting none too easily, rode along
the Tercanbury Road till I came to the old turnpike
and turned into Joy Lane.</p>

<p class="pindent">The sky was blue and the air, warm and yet fresh,
crackled, as it were, with the heat. The light was
brilliant without harshness. The sun’s beams seemed
to hit the white road with a directed energy and
bounce back like a rubber ball.</p>

<p class="pindent">I rode backward and forward, waiting for the
Driffields, and presently saw them come. I waved
to them and turned round (getting off to do so)
and we pedalled along together. Mrs. Driffield and
I complimented one another on our progress. We
rode anxiously, clinging like grim death to the
handle-bars, but exultant, and Driffield said that as
soon as we felt sure of ourselves we must go for
rides all over the country.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I want to get rubbings of one or two brasses in
the neighbourhood,” he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">I did not know what he meant, but he would not
explain.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Wait and I’ll show you,” he said. “Do you think
you could ride fourteen miles to-morrow, seven there
and seven back?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Rather,” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll bring a sheet of paper for you and some wax
and you can make a rubbing. But you’d better ask
your uncle if you can come.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I needn’t do that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think you’d better all the same.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Driffield gave me that peculiar look of hers,
mischievous and yet friendly, and I blushed scarlet.
I knew that if I asked my uncle he would say no.
It would be much better to say nothing about it. But
as we rode along I saw coming toward us the doctor
in his dogcart. I looked straight in front of me as
he passed in the vain hope that if I did not look at
him he would not look at me. I was uneasy. If he
had seen me the fact would quickly reach the ears
of my uncle or my aunt and I considered whether it
would not be safer to disclose myself a secret that
could no longer be concealed. When we parted at
the vicarage gates (I had not been able to avoid
riding as far as this in their company) Driffield said
that if I found I could come with them next day I
had better call for them as early as I could.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You know where we live, don’t you? Next door
to the Congregational Church. It’s called Lime Cottage.”</p>

<p class="pindent">When I sat down to dinner I looked for an opportunity
to slip in casually the information that I
had by accident run across the Driffields; but news
travelled fast in Blackstable.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Who were those people you were bicycling with
this morning?” asked my aunt. “We met Dr. Anstey
in the town and he said he’d seen you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">My uncle, chewing his roast beef with an air of
disapproval, looked sullenly at his plate.</p>

<p class="pindent">“The Driffields,” I said with nonchalance. “You
know, the author. Mr. Galloway knows them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“They’re most disreputable people,” said my
uncle. “I don’t wish you to associate with them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why not?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m not going to give you my reasons. It’s enough
that I don’t wish it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How did you ever get to know them?” asked my
aunt.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I was just riding along and they were riding
along, and they asked me if I’d like to ride with
them,” I said, distorting the truth a little.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I call it very pushing,” said my uncle.</p>

<p class="pindent">I began to sulk. And to show my indignation when
the sweet was put on the table, though it was raspberry
tart which I was extremely fond of, I refused
to have any. My aunt asked me if I was not feeling
very well.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” I said, as haughtily as I could, “I’m feeling
all right.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Have a little bit,” said my aunt.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m not hungry,” I answered.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Just to please me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He must know when he’s had enough,” said my
uncle.</p>

<p class="pindent">I gave him a bitter look.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t mind having a small piece,” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">My aunt gave me a generous helping, which I ate
with the air of one who, impelled by a stern sense of
duty, performs an act that is deeply distasteful to
him. It was a beautiful raspberry tart. Mary-Ann
made short pastry that melted in the mouth. But
when my aunt asked me whether I could not manage
a little more I refused with cold dignity. She
did not insist. My uncle said grace and I carried my
outraged feelings into the drawing room.</p>

<p class="pindent">But when I reckoned that the servants had finished
their dinner I went into the kitchen. Emily
was cleaning the silver in the pantry. Mary-Ann was
washing up.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I say, what’s wrong with the Driffields?” I asked
her.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mary-Ann had come to the vicarage when she was
eighteen. She had bathed me when I was a small boy,
given me powders in plum jam when I needed them,
packed my box when I went to school, nursed me when
I was ill, read to me when I was bored, and scolded
me when I was naughty. Emily, the housemaid, was
a flighty young thing, and Mary-Ann didn’t know
whatever would become of me if <span class="it">she</span> had the looking
after of me. Mary-Ann was a Blackstable girl. She
had never been to London in her life and I do not
think she had been to Tercanbury more than three
or four times. She was never ill. She never had a
holiday. She was paid twelve pounds a year. One
evening a week she went down the town to see her
mother, who did the vicarage washing; and on Sunday
evenings she went to church. But Mary-Ann
knew everything that went on in Blackstable. She
knew who everybody was, who had married whom,
what anyone’s father had died of, and how many
children, and what they were called, any woman had
had.</p>

<p class="pindent">I asked Mary-Ann my question and she slopped a
wet clout noisily into the sink.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t blame your uncle,” she said. “I wouldn’t
let you go about with them, not if you was my
nephew. Fancy their askin’ you to ride your bicycle
with them! Some people will do anything.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I saw that the conversation in the dining room
had been repeated to Mary-Ann.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m not a child,” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“That makes it all the worse. The impudence of
their comin’ ’ere at all!” Mary-Ann dropped her
aitches freely. “Takin’ a house and pretendin’ to be
ladies and gentlemen. Now leave that pie alone.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The raspberry tart was standing on the kitchen
table and I broke off a piece of crust with my fingers
and put it in my mouth.</p>

<p class="pindent">“We’re goin’ to eat that for our supper. If you’d
wanted a second ’elpin’ why didn’t you ’ave one when
you was ’avin’ your dinner? Ted Driffield never could
stick to anything. He ’ad a good education, too. The
one I’m sorry for is his mother. He’s been a trouble
to ’er from the day he was born. And then to go
an’ marry Rosie Gann. They tell me that when he
told his mother what he was goin’ to do she took
to ’er bed and stayed there for three weeks and
wouldn’t talk to anybody.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Was Mrs. Driffield Rosie Gann before she married?
Which Ganns were those?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Gann was one of the commonest names at Blackstable.
The churchyard was thick with their graves.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, you wouldn’t ’ave known them. Old Josiah
Gann was her father. He was a wild one, too. He
went for a soldier and when he come back he ’ad a
wooden leg. He used to go out doing painting, but
he was out of work more often than not. They lived
in the next ’ouse to us in Rye Lane. Me an’ Rosie
used to go to Sunday school together.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But she’s not as old as you are,” I said with the
bluntness of my age.</p>

<p class="pindent">“She’ll never see thirty again.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mary-Ann was a little woman with a snub nose
and decayed teeth, but fresh-coloured, and I do not
suppose she could have been more than thirty-five.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Rosie ain’t more than four or five years younger
than me, whatever she may pretend she is. They tell
me you wouldn’t know her now all dressed up and
everything.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Is it true that she was a barmaid?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, at the Railway Arms and then at the Prince
of Wales’s Feathers at Haversham. Mrs. Reeves
’ad her to ’elp in the bar at the Railway Arms, but
it got so bad she had to get rid of her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The Railway Arms was a very modest little public
house just opposite the station of the London, Chatham
&amp; Dover Railway. It had a sort of sinister gaiety.
On a winter’s night as you passed by you saw through
the glass doors men lounging about the bar. My uncle
very much disapproved of it, and had for years been
trying to get its license taken away. It was frequented
by the railway porters, colliers, and farm
labourers. The respectable residents of Blackstable
would have disdained to enter it and, when they
wanted a glass of bitter, went to the Bear and Key
or the Duke of Kent.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, what did she do?” I asked, my eyes popping
out of my head.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What didn’t she do?” said Mary-Ann. “What
d’you think your uncle would say if he caught me
tellin’ you things like that? There wasn’t a man
who come in to ’ave a drink that she didn’t carry
on with. No matter who they was. She couldn’t stick
to anybody, it was just one man after another. They
tell me it was simply ’orrible. That was when it
begun with Lord George. It wasn’t the sort of place
he was likely to go to, he was too grand for that, but
they say he went in accidental like one day when his
train was late, and he saw her. And after that he
was never out of the place, mixin’ with all them
common rough people, and of course they all knew
what he was there for, and him with a wife and three
children. Oh, I was sorry for her! And the talk it
made. Well, it got so Mrs. Reeves said she wasn’t
going to put up with it another day and she gave her
her wages and told her to pack her box and go. Good
riddance to bad rubbish, that’s what I said.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I knew Lord George very well. His name was
George Kemp and the title by which he was always
known had been given him ironically owing to his
grand manner. He was our coal merchant, but he
also dabbled in house property, and he owned a share
in one or two colliers. He lived in a new brick house
that stood in its own grounds and he drove his own
trap. He was a stoutish man with a pointed beard,
florid, with a high colour and bold blue eyes. Remembering
him, I think he must have looked like
some jolly rubicund merchant in an old Dutch picture.
He was always very flashily dressed and when
you saw him driving at a smart pace down the middle
of the High Street in a fawn-coloured covert-coat
with large buttons, his brown bowler on the side of
his head and a red rose in his buttonhole, you could
not but look at him. On Sunday he used to come to
church in a lustrous topper and a frock coat. Everyone
knew that he wanted to be made churchwarden,
and it was evident that his energy would have made
him useful, but my uncle said not in his time, and
though Lord George as a protest went to chapel for
a year my uncle remained obdurate. He cut him
dead when he met him in the town. A reconciliation
was effected and Lord George came to church again,
but my uncle only yielded so far as to appoint him
sidesman. The gentry thought him extremely vulgar
and I have no doubt that he was vain and boastful.
They complained of his loud voice and his strident
laugh—when he was talking to somebody on one
side of the street you heard every word he said from
the other—and they thought his manners dreadful.
He was much too friendly; when he talked to them
it was as though he were not in trade at all; they
said he was very pushing. But if he thought his hail-fellow-well-met
air, his activity in public works, his
open purse when subscriptions were needed for the
annual regatta or for the harvest festival, his willingness
to do anyone a good turn were going to break
the barriers at Blackstable he was mistaken. His
efforts at sociability were met with blank hostility.</p>

<p class="pindent">I remember once that the doctor’s wife was calling
on my aunt and Emily came in to tell my uncle that
Mr. George Kemp would like to see him.</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I heard the front door ring, Emily,” said
my aunt.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes’m, he came to the front door.”</p>

<p class="pindent">There was a moment’s awkwardness. Everyone
was at a loss to know how to deal with such an unusual
occurrence, and even Emily, who knew who
should come to the front door, who should go to
the side door, and who to the back, looked a trifle
flustered. My aunt, who was a gentle soul, I think
felt honestly embarrassed that anyone should put
himself in such a false position; but the doctor’s wife
gave a little sniff of contempt. At last my uncle collected
himself.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Show him into the study, Emily,” he said. “I’ll
come as soon as I’ve finished my tea.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But Lord George remained exuberant, flashy, loud,
and boisterous. He said the town was dead and he
was going to wake it up. He was going to get the
company to run excursion trains. He didn’t see why
it shouldn’t become another Margate. And why
shouldn’t they have a mayor? Ferne Bay had one.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose he thinks he’d be mayor himself,” said
the people of Blackstable. They pursed their lips.
“Pride goeth before a fall,” they said.</p>

<p class="pindent">And my uncle remarked that you could take a
horse to the water but you couldn’t make him drink.</p>

<p class="pindent">I should add that I looked upon Lord George with
the same scornful derision as everyone else. It outraged
me that he should stop me in the street and
call me by my Christian name and talk to me as
though there were no social difference between us.
He even suggested that I should play cricket with
his sons, who were of about the same age as myself.
But they went to the grammar school at Haversham
and of course I couldn’t possibly have anything to
do with them.</p>

<p class="pindent">I was shocked and thrilled by what Mary-Ann told
me, but I had difficulty in believing it. I had read too
many novels and had learnt too much at school not
to know a good deal about love, but I thought it was
a matter that only concerned young people. I could
not conceive that a man with a beard, who had sons
as old as I, could have any feelings of that sort. I
thought when you married all that was finished. That
people over thirty should be in love seemed to me
rather disgusting.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You don’t mean to say they did anything?” I
asked Mary-Ann.</p>

<p class="pindent">“From what I hear there’s very little that Rosie
Gann didn’t do. And Lord George wasn’t the only
one.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But, look here, why didn’t she have a baby?”</p>

<p class="pindent">In the novels I had read whenever lovely woman
stooped to folly she had a baby. The cause was put
with infinite precaution, sometimes indeed suggested
only by a row of asterisks, but the result was inevitable.</p>

<p class="pindent">“More by good luck than by good management, I
lay,” said Mary-Ann. Then she recollected herself
and stopped drying the plates she was busy with. “It
seems to me you know a lot more than you ought
to,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course I know,” I said importantly. “Hang it
all, I’m practically grown up, aren’t I?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“All I can tell you,” said Mary-Ann, “is that when
Mrs. Reeves gave her the sack Lord George got
her a job at the Prince of Wales’s Feathers at Haversham
and he was always poppin’ over there in his
trap. You can’t tell me the ale’s any different over
there from what it is here.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then why did Ted Driffield marry her?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ask me another,” said Mary-Ann. “It was at
the Feathers he saw her. I suppose he couldn’t get
anyone else to marry him. No respectable girl would
’ave ’ad ’im.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Did he know about her?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’d better ask him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was silent. It was all very puzzling.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What does she look like now?” asked Mary-Ann.
“I never seen her since she married. I never
even speak to ’er after I ’eard what was goin’ on at
the Railway Arms.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She looks all right,” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, you ask her if she remembers me and see
what she says.”</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">VI</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">I had</span> quite made up my mind that I was going out
with the Driffields next morning, but knew that it
was no good asking my uncle if I might. If he found
out that I had been and made a row it couldn’t be
helped, and if Ted Driffield asked me whether I had
got my uncle’s permission I was quite prepared to
say I had. But I had after all no need to lie. In the
afternoon, the tide being high, I walked down to
the beach to bathe and my uncle, having something
to do in the town, walked part of the way with me.
Just as we were passing the Bear and Key, Ted
Driffield stepped out of it. He saw us and came
straight up to my uncle. I was startled at his coolness.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good afternoon, Vicar,” he said. “I wonder if
you remember me. I used to sing in the choir when
I was a boy. Ted Driffield. My old governor was Miss
Wolfe’s bailiff.”</p>

<p class="pindent">My uncle was a very timid man, and he was taken
aback.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes, how do you do? I was sorry to hear
your father died.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ve made the acquaintance of your young
nephew. I was wondering if you’d let him come for
a ride with me to-morrow. It’s rather dull for him
riding alone, and I’m going to do a rubbing of one
of the brasses at Ferne Church.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s very kind of you, but——”</p>

<p class="pindent">My uncle was going to refuse, but Driffield interrupted
him.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll see he doesn’t get up to any mischief. I
thought he might like to make a rubbing himself. It
would be an interest for him. I’ll give him some
paper and wax so that it won’t cost him anything.”</p>

<p class="pindent">My uncle had not a consecutive mind and the
suggestion that Ted Driffield should pay for my
paper and wax offended him so much that he quite
forgot his intention to forbid me to go at all.</p>

<p class="pindent">“He can quite well get his own paper and wax,”
he said. “He has plenty of pocket money, and he’d
much better spend it on something like that than on
sweets and make himself sick.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, if he goes to Hayward, the stationer’s, and
says he wants the same paper as I got and the wax
they’ll let him have it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll go now,” I said, and to prevent any change
of mind on my uncle’s part dashed across the road.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">VII</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">I do</span> not know why the Driffields bothered about me
unless it was from pure kindness of heart. I was a
dull little boy, not very talkative, and if I amused
Ted Driffield at all it must have been unconsciously.
Perhaps he was tickled by my attitude of superiority.
I was under the impression that it was condescension
on my part to consort with the son of Miss Wolfe’s
bailiff, and he what my uncle called a penny-a-liner;
and when, perhaps with a trace of superciliousness,
I asked him to lend me one of his books and he said
it wouldn’t interest me I took him at his word and
did not insist. After my uncle had once consented to
my going out with the Driffields he made no further
objection to my association with them. Sometimes we
went for sails together, sometimes we went to some
picturesque spot and Driffield painted a little water
colour. I do not know if the English climate was better
in those days or if it is only an illusion of youth,
but I seem to remember that all through that summer
the sunny days followed one another in an unbroken
line. I began to feel a curious affection for the undulating,
opulent, and gracious country. We went
far afield, to one church after another, taking rubbings
of brasses, knights in armour and ladies in
stiff farthingales. Ted Driffield fired me with his own
enthusiasm for this naïve pursuit and I rubbed with
passion. I showed my uncle proudly the results of
my industry, and I suppose he thought that whatever
my company, I could not come to much harm when I
was occupied in church. Mrs. Driffield used to remain
in the churchyard while we were at work, not
reading or sewing, but just mooning about; she
seemed able to do nothing for an indefinite time without
feeling bored. Sometimes I would go out and sit
with her for a little on the grass. We chattered about
my school, my friends there and my masters, about
the people at Blackstable, and about nothing at all.
She gratified me by calling me Mr. Ashenden. I
think she was the first person who had ever done
so and it made me feel grown up. I resented it vastly
when people called me Master Willie. I thought it
a ridiculous name for anyone to have. In fact I did
not like either of my names and spent much time
inventing others that would have suited me better.
The ones I preferred were Roderic Ravensworth and
I covered sheets of paper with this signature in a
suitably dashing hand. I did not mind Ludovic Montgomery
either.</p>

<p class="pindent">I could not get over what Mary-Ann had told me
about Mrs. Driffield. Though I knew theoretically
what people did when they were married, and was
capable of putting the facts in the bluntest language,
I did not really understand it. I thought it indeed
rather disgusting and I did not quite, quite believe
it. After all, I was aware that the earth was round,
but I <span class="it">knew</span> it was flat. Mrs. Driffield seemed so frank,
her laugh was so open and simple, there was in her
demeanour something so young and childlike, that
I could not see her “going with” sailors and above
all anyone so gross and horrible as Lord George.
She was not at all the type of the wicked woman I
had read of in novels. Of course I knew she wasn’t
“good form” and she spoke with the Blackstable
accent, she dropped an aitch now and then, and sometimes
her grammar gave me a shock, but I couldn’t
help liking her. I came to the conclusion that what
Mary-Ann had told me was a pack of lies.</p>

<p class="pindent">One day I happened to tell her that Mary-Ann
was our cook.</p>

<p class="pindent">“She says she lived next door to you in Rye Lane,”
I added, quite prepared to hear Mrs. Driffield say
that she had never even heard of her.</p>

<p class="pindent">But she smiled and her blue eyes gleamed.</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s right. She used to take me to Sunday
school. She used to have a rare job keeping me quiet.
I heard she’d gone to service at the vicarage. Fancy
her being there still! I haven’t seen her for donkey’s
years. I’d like to see her again and have a chat about
old days. Remember me to her, will you, and ask her
to look in on her evening out. I’ll give her a cup
of tea.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was taken aback at this. After all, the Driffields
lived in a house that they were talking of buying and
they had a “general.” It wouldn’t be at all the thing
for them to have Mary-Ann to tea, and it would make
it very awkward for me. They seemed to have no
sense of the things one could do and the things one
simply couldn’t. It never ceased to embarrass me, the
way in which they talked of incidents in their past that
I should have thought they would not dream of mentioning.
I do not know that the people I lived among
were pretentious in the sense of making themselves
out to be richer or grander than they really were, but
looking back it does seem to me that they lived a life
full of pretences. They dwelt behind a mask of respectability.
You never caught them in their shirt
sleeves with their feet on the table. The ladies put on
afternoon dresses and were not visible till then; they
lived privately with rigid economy so that you could
not drop in for a casual meal, but when they entertained
their tables groaned with food. Though catastrophe
overwhelmed the family, they held their heads
high and ignored it. One of the sons might have married
an actress, but they never referred to the calamity,
and though the neighbours said it was dreadful,
they took ostentatious care not to mention the theatre
in the presence of the afflicted. We all knew that the
wife of Major Greencourt who had taken the Three
Gables was connected with trade, but neither she nor
the major ever so much as hinted at the discreditable
secret; and though we sniffed at them behind their
backs, we were too polite even to mention crockery
(the source of Mrs. Greencourt’s adequate income)
in their presence. It was still not unheard of for an
angry parent to cut off his son with a shilling or to
tell his daughter (who like my own mother had married
a solicitor) never to darken his doors again. I
was used to all this and it seemed to me perfectly
natural. What did shock me was to hear Ted Driffield
speak of being a waiter in a restaurant in Holborn
as though it were the most ordinary thing in the
world. I knew he had run away to sea, that was romantic;
I knew that boys, in books at all events, often
did this and had thrilling adventures before they
married a fortune and an earl’s daughter; but Ted
Driffield had driven a cab at Maidstone and had been
clerk in a booking office at Birmingham. Once when
we bicycled past the Railway Arms, Mrs. Driffield
mentioned quite casually, as though it were something
that anyone might have done, that she had
worked there for three years.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It was my first place,” she said. “After that I
went to the Feathers at Haversham. I only left there
to get married.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She laughed as though she enjoyed the recollection.
I did not know what to say; I did not know
which way to look; I blushed scarlet. Another time
when we were going through Ferne Bay on our way
back from a long excursion, it being a hot day and
all of us thirsty, she suggested that we should go into
the Dolphin and have a glass of beer. She began
talking to the girl behind the bar and I was horrified
to hear her remark that she had been in the business
herself for five years. The landlord joined us and
Ted Driffield offered him a drink, and Mrs. Driffield
said that the barmaid must have a glass of port,
and for some time they all chatted amiably about
trade and tied houses and how the price of everything
was going up. Meanwhile, I stood, hot and cold
all over, and not knowing what to do with myself.
As we went out Mrs. Driffield remarked:</p>

<p class="pindent">“I took quite a fancy to that girl, Ted. She ought
to do well for herself. As I said to her, it’s a hard
life but a merry one. You do see a bit of what’s going
on and if you play your cards right you ought to
marry well. I noticed she had an engagement ring
on, but she told me she just wore that because it gave
the fellows a chance to tease her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Driffield laughed. She turned to me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I had a rare old time when I was a barmaid, but
of course you can’t go on for ever. You have to think
of your future.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But a greater jolt awaited me. It was halfway
through September and my holidays were drawing
to an end. I was very full of the Driffields, but my
desire to talk about them at home was snubbed by
my uncle.</p>

<p class="pindent">“We don’t want your friends pushed down our
throats all day long,” said he. “There are other
topics of conversation that are more suitable. But
I do think that, as Ted Driffield was born in the
parish and is seeing you almost every day, he might
come to church occasionally.”</p>

<p class="pindent">One day I told Driffield: “My uncle wants you to
come to church.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right. Let’s go to church next Sunday night,
Rosie.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t mind,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">I told Mary-Ann they were going. I sat in the
vicarage pew just behind the squire’s and I could
not look round, but I was conscious by the behaviour
of my neighbours on the other side of the aisle that
they were there, and as soon as I had a chance next
day I asked Mary-Ann if she had seen them.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I see ’er all right,” said Mary-Ann grimly.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Did you speak to her afterward?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Me?” She suddenly burst into anger. “You get
out of my kitchen. What d’you want to come bothering
me all day long? How d’you expect me to do my
work with you getting in my way all the time?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right,” I said. “Don’t get in a wax.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t know what your uncle’s about lettin’ you
go all over the place with the likes of them. All them
flowers in her ’at. I wonder she ain’t ashamed to
show her face. Now run along, I’m busy.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I did not know why Mary-Ann was so cross. I did
not mention Mrs. Driffield again. But two or three
days later I happened to go into the kitchen to get
something I wanted. There were two kitchens at the
vicarage, a small one in which the cooking was done
and a large one, built I suppose for a time when country
clergymen had large families and gave grand
dinners to the surrounding gentry, where Mary-Ann
sat and sewed when her day’s work was over. We
had cold supper at eight so that after tea she had
little to do. It was getting on for seven and the day
was drawing in. It was Emily’s evening out and I
expected to find Mary-Ann alone, but as I went
along the passage I heard voices and the sound of
laughter. I supposed Mary-Ann had someone in to
see her. The lamp was lit, but it had a thick green
shade and the kitchen was almost in darkness. I saw
a teapot and cups on the table. Mary-Ann was having
a late cup of tea with her friend. The conversation
stopped as I opened the door, then I heard a
voice.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good-evening.”</p>

<p class="pindent">With a start I saw that Mary-Ann’s friend was
Mrs. Driffield. Mary-Ann laughed a little at my
surprise.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Rosie Gann dropped in to have a cup of tea with
me,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“We’ve been having a talk about old times.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mary-Ann was a little shy at my finding her thus,
but not half so shy as I. Mrs. Driffield gave me that
childlike, mischievous smile of hers; she was perfectly
at her ease. For some reason I noticed her
dress. I suppose because I had never seen her so
grand before. It was of pale blue cloth, very tight
at the waist, with high sleeves and a long skirt with
a flounce at the bottom. She wore a large black straw
hat with a great quantity of roses and leaves and
bows on it. It was evidently the hat she had worn in
church on Sunday.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I thought if I went on waiting till Mary-Ann came
to see me I’d have to wait till doomsday, so I thought
the best thing I could do was to come and see her
myself.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mary-Ann grinned self-consciously, but did not
look displeased. I asked for whatever it was I
wanted and as quickly as I could left them. I went
out into the garden and wandered about aimlessly.
I walked down to the road and looked over the gate.
The night had fallen. Presently I saw a man strolling
along. I paid no attention to him, but he passed backward
and forward and it looked as though he were
waiting for someone. At first I thought it might
be Ted Driffield and I was on the point of going out
when he stopped and lit a pipe; I saw it was Lord
George. I wondered what he was doing there and
at the same moment it struck me that he was waiting
for Mrs. Driffield. My heart began to beat fast,
and though I was hidden by the darkness I withdrew
into the shade of the bushes. I waited a few minutes
longer, then I saw the side door open and Mrs. Driffield
let out by Mary-Ann. I heard her footsteps on
the gravel. She came to the gate and opened it. It
opened with a little click. At the sound Lord George
stepped across the road and before she could come
out slipped in. He took her in his arms and gave her
a great hug. She gave a little laugh.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Take care of my hat,” she whispered.</p>

<p class="pindent">I was not more than three feet away from them
and I was terrified lest they should notice me. I was
so ashamed for them. I was trembling with agitation.
For a minute he held her in his arms.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What about the garden?” he said, still in a
whisper.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, there’s that boy. Let’s go in the fields.”</p>

<p class="pindent">They went out by the gate, he with his arm round
her waist, and were lost in the night. Now I felt my
heart pounding against my chest so that I could
hardly breathe. I was so astonished at what I had
seen that I could not think sensibly. I would have
given anything to be able to tell someone, but it was
a secret and I must keep it. I was thrilled with the
importance it gave me. I walked slowly up to the
house and let myself in by the side door. Mary-Ann,
hearing it open, called me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Is that you, Master Willie?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I looked in the kitchen. Mary-Ann was putting the
supper on a tray to take it into the dining room.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wouldn’t say anything to your uncle about Rosie
Gann ’avin’ been here,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It was a surprisement to me. When I ’eared a
knock at the side door and opened it and saw Rosie
standing there, you could ’ave knocked me down with
a feather. ‘Mary-Ann,’ she says, an’ before I knew
what she was up to she was kissing me all over me
face. I couldn’t but ask ’er in and when she was in I
couldn’t but ask her to ’ave a nice cup of tea.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mary-Ann was anxious to excuse herself. After
all she had said of Mrs. Driffield it must seem
strange to me that I should find them sitting there
together chatting away and laughing. I did not want
to crow.</p>

<p class="pindent">“She’s not so bad, is she?” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mary-Ann smiled. Notwithstanding her black decayed
teeth there was in her smile something sweet
and touching.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t ’ardly know what it is, but there’s somethin’
you can’t ’elp likin’ about her. She was ’ere the
best part of an hour and I will say that for ’er, she
never once give ’erself airs. And she told me with
’er own lips the material of that dress she ’ad on cost
thirteen and eleven a yard and I believe it. She remembers
everything, how I used to brush her ’air
for her when she was a tiny tot and how I used to
make her wash her little ’ands before tea. You see,
sometimes her mother used to send ’er in to ’ave her
tea with us. She was as pretty as a picture in them
days.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mary-Ann looked back into the past and her funny
crumpled face grew wistful.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, well,” she said after a pause, “I dare say
she’s been no worse than plenty of others if the truth
was only known. She ’ad more temptation than most,
and I dare say a lot of them as blame her would ’ave
been no better than what she was if they’d ’ad the
opportunity.”</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">VIII</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">The weather</span> broke suddenly; it grew chilly and
heavy rain fell. It put an end to our excursions. I was
not sorry, for I did not know how I could look Mrs.
Driffield in the face now that I had seen her meeting
with George Kemp. I was not so much shocked
as astonished. I could not understand how it was
possible for her to like being kissed by an old man,
and the fantastic notion passed through my mind,
filled with the novels I had read, that somehow Lord
George held her in his power and forced her by his
knowledge of some fearful secret to submit to his
loathsome embraces. My imagination played with
terrible possibilities. Bigamy, murder, and forgery.
Very few villains in books failed to hold the threat
of exposure of one of these crimes over some hapless
female. Perhaps Mrs. Driffield had backed a bill; I
never could quite understand what this meant, but I
knew that the consequences were disastrous. I toyed
with the fancy of her anguish (the long sleepless
nights when she sat at her window in her nightdress,
her long fair hair hanging to her knees, and watched
hopelessly for the dawn) and saw myself (not a boy
of fifteen with sixpence a week pocket money, but a
tall man with a waxed moustache and muscles of
steel in faultless evening dress) with a happy blend
of heroism and dexterity rescuing her from the toils
of the rascally blackmailer. On the other hand, it
had not looked as though she had yielded quite unwillingly
to Lord George’s fondling and I could not
get out of my ears the sound of her laugh. It had
a note that I had never heard before. It gave me a
queer feeling of breathlessness.</p>

<p class="pindent">During the rest of my holidays I only saw the
Driffields once more. I met them by chance in the
town and they stopped and spoke to me. I suddenly
felt very shy again, but when I looked at Mrs. Driffield
I could not help blushing with embarrassment,
for there was nothing in her countenance that indicated
a guilty secret. She looked at me with those
soft blue eyes of hers in which there was a child’s
playful naughtiness. She often held her mouth a little
open, as though it were just going to break into a
smile, and her lips were full and red. There was
honesty and innocence in her face and an ingenuous
frankness and though then I could not have expressed
this, I felt it quite strongly. If I had put it into words
at all I think I should have said: She looks as straight
as a die. It was impossible that she could be “carrying
on” with Lord George. There must be an explanation;
I did not believe what my eyes had seen.</p>

<p class="pindent">Then the day came when I had to go back to
school. The carter had taken my trunk and I walked
to the station by myself. I had refused to let my
aunt see me off, thinking it more manly to go alone,
but I felt rather low as I walked down the street.
It was a small branch line to Tercanbury and the
station was at the other end of the town near the
beach. I took my ticket and settled myself in the
corner of a third-class carriage. Suddenly I heard
a voice: “There he is”; and Mr. and Mrs. Driffield
bustled gaily up.</p>

<p class="pindent">“We thought we must come and see you off,” she
said. “Are you feeling miserable?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, of course not.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, well, it won’t last long. We’ll have no end
of a time when you come back for Christmas. Can
you skate?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I can. I’ll teach you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Her high spirits cheered me, and at the same time
the thought that they had come to the station to say
good-bye to me gave me a lump in my throat. I tried
hard not to let the emotion I felt appear on my face.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I expect I shall be playing a lot of football this
term,” I said. “I ought to get into the second fifteen.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She looked at me with kindly shining eyes, smiling
with her full red lips. There was something in her
smile I had always rather liked, and her voice seemed
almost to tremble with a laugh or a tear. For one
horrible moment I was afraid that she was going
to kiss me. I was scared out of my wits. She talked
on, she was mildly facetious as grown-up people are
with schoolboys, and Driffield stood there without
saying anything. He looked at me with a smile in his
eyes and pulled his beard. Then the guard blew a
cracked whistle and waved a red flag. Mrs. Driffield
took my hand and shook it. Driffield came forward.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good-bye,” he said. “Here’s something for you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He pressed a tiny packet into my hand and the
train steamed off. When I opened it I found that it
was two half-crowns wrapped in a piece of toilet
paper. I blushed to the roots of my hair. I was glad
enough to have an extra five shillings, but the thought
that Ted Driffield had dared to give me a tip filled
me with rage and humiliation. I could not possibly
accept anything from him. It was true that I had
bicycled with him and sailed with him, but he wasn’t
a sahib (I had got that from Major Greencourt)
and it was an insult to me to give me five shillings.
At first I thought of returning the money without
a word, showing by my silence how outraged I was
at the solecism he had committed, then I composed
in my head a dignified and frigid letter in which I
thanked him for his generosity, but said that he
must see how impossible it was for a gentleman to
accept a tip from someone who was practically a
stranger. I thought it over for two or three days
and every day it seemed more difficult to me to part
with the two half-crowns. I felt sure that Driffield
had meant it kindly, and of course he was very bad
form and didn’t know about things; it would be
rather hard to hurt his feelings by sending the money
back, and finally I spent it. But I assuaged my
wounded pride by not writing to thank Driffield for
his gift.</p>

<p class="pindent">When Christmas came, however, and I went back
to Blackstable for the holidays, it was the Driffields
I was most eager to see. In that stagnant little place
they alone seemed to have a connection with the outside
world which already was beginning to touch my
daydreams with anxious curiosity. But I could not
overcome my shyness enough to go to their house
and call, and I hoped that I should meet them in the
town. But the weather was dreadful, a boisterous
wind whistled down the street, piercing you to the
bone, and the few women who had an errand were
swept along by their full skirts like fishing boats in half
a gale. The cold rain scudded in sudden squalls and
the sky, which in summer had enclosed the friendly
country so snugly, now was a great pall that pressed
upon the earth with sullen menace. There was small
hope of meeting the Driffields by chance and at last
I took my courage in both hands and one day after
tea slipped out. As far as the station the road was
pitch dark, but there the street lamps, few and dim,
made it easier to keep to the pavement. The Driffields
lived in a little two-story house in a side street; it was
of dingy yellow brick and had a bow window. I
knocked and presently a little maid opened the door;
I asked if Mrs. Driffield was in. She gave me an uncertain
look and, saying she would go and see, left
me standing in the passage. I had already heard
voices in the next room, but they were stilled as she
opened the door and, entering, shut it behind her.
I had a faint impression of mystery; in the houses of
my uncle’s friends, even if there was no fire and the
gas had to be lit as you went in, you were shown into
the drawing room when you called. But the door was
opened and Driffield came out. There was only a
speck of light in the passage and at first he could
not see who it was; but in an instant he recognized
me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, it’s you. We wondered when we were going
to see you.” Then he called out: “Rosie, it’s young
Ashenden.”</p>

<p class="pindent">There was a cry and before you could say knife
Mrs. Driffield had come into the passage and was
shaking my hands.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Come in, come in. Take off your coat. Isn’t it
awful, the weather? You must be perishing.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She helped me with my coat and took off my
muffler and snatched my cap out of my hand and
drew me into the room. It was hot and stuffy, a tiny
room full of furniture, with a fire burning in the
grate; they had gas there, which we hadn’t at the
vicarage, and the three burners in round globes of
frosted glass filled the room with harsh light. The
air was gray with tobacco smoke. At first, dazzled
and then taken aback by my effusive welcome, I did
not see who the two men were who got up as I came
in. Then I saw they were the curate, Mr. Galloway,
and Lord George Kemp. I fancied that the curate
shook my hand with constraint.</p>

<p class="pindent">“How are you? I just came in to return some
books that Mr. Driffield had lent me and Mrs. Driffield
very kindly asked me to stay to tea.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I felt rather than saw the quizzical look that Driffield
gave him. He said something about the mammon
of unrighteousness, which I recognized as a quotation,
but did not gather the sense of. Mr. Galloway
laughed.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t know about that,” he said. “What about
the publicans and sinners?”</p>

<p class="pindent">I thought the remark in very bad taste, but I was
immediately seized upon by Lord George. There was
no constraint about him.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, young fellow, home for the holidays? My
word, what a big chap you’re growing.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I shook hands with him rather coldly. I wished I
had not come.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Let me give you a nice strong cup of tea,” said
Mrs. Driffield.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ve already had tea.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Have some more,” said Lord George, speaking
as though he owned the place (that was just like
him). “A big fellow like you can always tuck away
another piece of bread and butter and jam and Mrs.
D. will cut you a slice with her own fair hands.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The tea things were still on the table and they
were sitting round it. A chair was brought up for
me and Mrs. Driffield gave me a piece of cake.</p>

<p class="pindent">“We were just trying to persuade Ted to sing us
a song,” said Lord George. “Come on, Ted.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Sing, ‘All Through Stickin’ to a Soljer,’ Ted,”
said Mrs. Driffield. “I love that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, sing ‘First We Mopped the Floor with
Him.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll sing ’em both if you’re not careful,” said
Driffield.</p>

<p class="pindent">He took his banjo, which was lying on the top of
the cottage piano, tuned it, and began to sing. He
had a rich baritone voice. I was quite used to people
singing songs. When there was a tea party at the
vicarage, or I went to one at the major’s or the doctor’s,
people always brought their music with them.
They left it in the hall, so that it should not seem
that they wanted to be asked to play or sing; but
after tea the hostess asked them if they had brought
it. They shyly admitted that they had, and if it was
at the vicarage I was sent to fetch it. Sometimes
a young lady would say that she had quite given up
playing and hadn’t brought anything with her, and
then her mother would break in and say that <span class="it">she</span>
had brought it. But when they sang it was not comic
songs; it was “I’ll Sing Thee Songs of Araby,” or
“Good-Night, Beloved,” or “Queen of My Heart.”
Once at the annual concert at the Assembly Rooms,
Smithson, the draper, had sung a comic song, and
though the people at the back of the hall had applauded
a great deal, the gentry had seen nothing
funny in it. Perhaps there wasn’t. Anyhow, before
the next concert he was asked to be a little more
careful about what he sang (“Remember there are
ladies present, Mr. Smithson”) and so gave “The
Death of Nelson.” The next ditty that Driffield sang
had a chorus and the curate and Lord George joined
in lustily. I heard it a good many times afterward,
but I can only remember four lines:</p>


          <div class="poetry-container" style="">
          <div class="lgp"> 
<div class="stanza-outer">
<p class="line0"><span class="it">First we mopped the floor with him;</span></p>
<p class="line0"><span class="it">Dragged him up and down the stairs;</span></p>
<p class="line0"><span class="it">Then we lugged him round the room,</span></p>
<p class="line0"><span class="it">Under tables, over chairs.</span></p>
</div>
</div></div> 

<p class="pindent">When it was finished, assuming my best company
manners, I turned to Mrs. Driffield.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you sing?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I do, but it always turns the milk, so Ted doesn’t
encourage me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Driffield put down his banjo and lit a pipe.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, how’s the old book getting along, Ted?”
said Lord George heartily.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, all right. I’m working away, you know.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good old Ted and his books,” Lord George
laughed. “Why don’t you settle down and do something
respectable for a change? I’ll give you a job
in my office.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I’m all right.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You let him be, George,” said Mrs. Driffield.
“He likes writing, and what I say is, as long as it
keeps him happy why shouldn’t he?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I don’t pretend to know anything about
books,” began George Kemp.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then don’t talk about them,” interrupted Driffield
with a smile.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t think anyone need be ashamed to have
written <span class="it">Fairhaven</span>,” said Mr. Galloway, “and I don’t
care what the critics said.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, Ted, I’ve known you since I was a boy and
<span class="it">I</span> couldn’t read it, try as I would.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, come on, we don’t want to start talking about
books,” said Mrs. Driffield. “Sing us another song,
Ted.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I must be going,” said the curate. He turned to
me. “We might walk along together. Have you got
anything for me to read, Driffield?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Driffield pointed to a pile of new books that were
heaped up on a table in the corner.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Take your pick.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“By Jove, what a lot!” I said, looking at them
greedily.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, it’s all rubbish. They’re sent down for review.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What d’you do with them?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Take ’em into Tercanbury and sell ’em for what
they’ll fetch. It all helps to pay the butcher.”</p>

<p class="pindent">When we left, the curate and I, he with three or
four books under his arm, he asked me:</p>

<p class="pindent">“Did you tell your uncle you were coming to see
the Driffields?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, I just went out for a walk and it suddenly
occurred to me that I might look in.”</p>

<p class="pindent">This of course was some way from the truth, but
I did not care to tell Mr. Galloway that, though I
was practically grown up, my uncle realized the fact
so little that he was quite capable of trying to prevent
me from seeing people he objected to.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Unless you have to I wouldn’t say anything about
it in your place. The Driffields are perfectly all right,
but your uncle doesn’t quite approve of them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I know,” I said. “It’s such rot.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course they’re rather common, but he doesn’t
write half badly, and when you think what he came
from it’s wonderful that he writes at all.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was glad to know how the land lay. Mr. Galloway
did not wish my uncle to know that he was on
friendly terms with the Driffields. I could feel sure
at all events that he would not give me away.</p>

<p class="pindent">The patronizing manner in which my uncle’s curate
spoke of one who has been now so long recognized as
one of the greatest of the later Victorian novelists
must arouse a smile; but it was the manner in which
he was generally spoken of at Blackstable. One day
we went to tea at Mrs. Greencourt’s, who had staying
with her a cousin, the wife of an Oxford don,
and we had been told that she was very cultivated.
She was a Mrs. Encombe, a little woman with an
eager wrinkled face; she surprised us very much because
she wore her gray hair short and a black serge
skirt that only just came down below the tops of her
square-toed boots. She was the first example of the
New Woman that had even been seen in Blackstable.
We were staggered and immediately on the defensive,
for she looked intellectual and it made us feel shy.
(Afterward we all scoffed at her, and my uncle said
to my aunt: “Well, my dear, I’m thankful you’re not
clever, at least I’ve been spared that”; and my aunt
in a playful mood put my uncle’s slippers which were
warming for him by the fire over her boots and said:
“Look, I’m the new woman.” And then we all said:
“Mrs. Greencourt is very funny; you never know
what she’ll do next. But of course she isn’t quite
quite.” We could hardly forget that her father made
china and that her grandfather had been a factory
hand.)</p>

<p class="pindent">But we all found it very interesting to hear Mrs.
Encombe talk of the people she knew. My uncle had
been at Oxford, but everyone he asked about seemed
to be dead. Mrs. Encombe knew Mrs. Humphry
Ward and admired <span class="it">Robert Elsmere</span>. My uncle considered
it a scandalous work, and he was surprised
that Mr. Gladstone, who at least called himself a
Christian, had found a good word to say for it. They
had quite an argument about it. My uncle said he
thought it would unsettle people’s opinions and give
them all sorts of ideas that they were much better
without. Mrs. Encombe answered that he wouldn’t
think that if he knew Mrs. Humphry Ward. She was
a woman of the very highest character, a niece of
Mr. Matthew Arnold, and whatever you might think
of the book itself (and she, Mrs. Encombe, was
quite willing to admit that there were parts which
had better have been omitted) it was quite certain
that she had written it from the very highest motives.
Mrs. Encombe knew Miss Broughton too. She was
of very good family and it was strange that she
wrote the books she did.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t see any harm in them,” said Mrs. Hayforth,
the doctor’s wife. “I enjoy them, especially
<span class="it">Red as a Rose is She</span>.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Would you like your girls to read them?” asked
Mrs. Encombe.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not just yet perhaps,” said Mrs. Hayforth. “But
when they’re married I should have no objection.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then it might interest you to know,” said Mrs.
Encombe, “that when I was in Florence last Easter
I was introduced to Ouida.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s quite another matter,” returned Mrs.
Hayforth. “I can’t believe that any lady would read
a book by Ouida.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I read one out of curiosity,” said Mrs. Encombe.
“I must say, it’s more what you’d expect from a
Frenchman than from an English gentlewoman.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, but I understand she isn’t really English.
I’ve always heard her real name is Mademoiselle
de la Ramée.”</p>

<p class="pindent">It was then that Mr. Galloway mentioned Edward
Driffield.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You know we have an author living here,” he
said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“We’re not very proud of him,” said the major.
“He’s the son of old Miss Wolfe’s bailiff and he
married a barmaid.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Can he write?” asked Mrs. Encombe.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You can tell at once that he’s not a gentleman,”
said the curate, “but when you consider the disadvantages
he’s had to struggle against it’s rather remarkable
that he should write as well as he does.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He’s a friend of Willie’s,” said my uncle.</p>

<p class="pindent">Everyone looked at me, and I felt very uncomfortable.</p>

<p class="pindent">“They bicycled together last summer, and after
Willie had gone back to school I got one of his
books from the library to see what it was like. I read
the first volume and then I sent it back. I wrote a
pretty stiff letter to the librarian and I was glad to
hear that he’d withdrawn it from circulation. If it
had been my own property I should have put it
promptly in the kitchen stove.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I looked through one of his books myself,” said
the doctor. “It interested me because it was set in
this neighbourhood and I recognized some of the
people. But I can’t say I liked it; I thought it unnecessarily
coarse.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I mentioned that to him,” said Mr. Galloway,
“and he said the men in the colliers that run up to
Newcastle and the fishermen and farm hands don’t
behave like ladies and gentlemen and don’t talk like
them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But why write about people of that character?”
said my uncle.</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s what I say,” said Mrs. Hayforth. “We
all know that there are coarse and wicked and vicious
people in the world, but I don’t see what good it
does to write about them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m not defending him,” said Mr. Galloway. “I’m
only telling you what explanation he gives himself.
And then of course he brought up Dickens.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Dickens is quite different,” said my uncle. “I
don’t see how anyone can object to the <span class="it">Pickwick
Papers</span>.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose it’s a matter of taste,” said my aunt.
“I always found Dickens very coarse. I don’t want
to read about people who drop their aitches. I must
say I’m very glad the weather’s so bad now and
Willie can’t take any more rides with Mr. Driffield.
I don’t think he’s quite the sort of person he
ought to associate with.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Both Mr. Galloway and I looked down our noses.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">IX</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">As often</span> as the mild Christmas gaieties of Blackstable
allowed me I went to the Driffields’ little house
next door to the Congregational chapel. I always
found Lord George and often Mr. Galloway. Our
conspiracy of silence had made us friends and when
we met at the vicarage or in the vestry after church
we looked at one another archly. We did not talk
about our secret, but we enjoyed it; I think it gave
us both a good deal of satisfaction to know that we
were making a fool of my uncle. But once it occurred
to me that George Kemp, meeting my uncle in the
street, might remark casually that he had been seeing
a lot of me at the Driffields’.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What about Lord George?” I said to Mr. Galloway.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I made that all right.”</p>

<p class="pindent">We chuckled. I began to like Lord George. At first
I was very cold with him and scrupulously polite, but
he seemed so unconscious of the social difference between
us that I was forced to conclude that my
haughty courtesy failed to put him in his place. He
was always cordial, breezy, even boisterous; he
chaffed me in his common way and I answered him
back with schoolboy wit; we made the others laugh
and this disposed me kindly toward him. He was for
ever bragging about the great schemes he had in
mind, but he took in good part my jokes at the expense
of his grandiose imaginations. It amused me
to hear him tell stories about the swells of Blackstable
that made them look foolish and when he mimicked
their oddities I roared with laughter. He was
blatant and vulgar and the way he dressed was always
a shock to me (I had never been to Newmarket
nor seen a trainer, but that was my idea of how a
Newmarket trainer dressed) and his table manners
were offensive, but I found myself less and less affronted
by him. He gave me the <span class="it">Pink ’Un</span> every week
and I took it home, carefully tucked away in my
great-coat pocket, and read it in my bedroom.</p>

<p class="pindent">I never went to the Driffields’ till after tea at the
vicarage, but I always managed to make a second
tea when I got there. Afterward Ted Driffield sang
comic songs, accompanying himself sometimes on
the banjo and sometimes on the piano. He would sing,
peering at the music with his rather short-sighted
eyes, for an hour at a time; there was a smile on his
lips and he liked us all to join in the chorus. We
played whist. I had learned the game when I was
a child and my uncle and aunt and I used to play
at the vicarage during the long winter evenings. My
uncle always took dummy, and though of course we
played for love, when my aunt and I lost I used to
retire under the dining room table and cry. Ted
Driffield did not play cards, he said he had no head
for them, and when we started a game he would sit
down by the fire and, pencil in hand, read one of the
books that had been sent down to him from London
to review. I had never played with three people before
and of course I did not play well, but Mrs. Driffield
had a natural card sense. Her movements as a
rule were rather deliberate, but when it came to
playing cards she was quick and alert. She played the
rest of us right off our heads. Ordinarily she did not
speak very much and then slowly, but when, after a
hand was played, she took the trouble good-humouredly
to point out to me my mistakes, she was
not only lucid but voluble. Lord George chaffed her
as he chaffed everybody; she would smile at his banter,
for she very seldom laughed, and sometimes make a
neat retort. They did not behave like lovers, but like
familiar friends, and I should have quite forgotten
what I had heard about them and what I had seen
but that now and then she gave him a look that embarrassed
me. Her eyes rested on him quietly, as
though he were not a man but a chair or a table, and
in them was a mischievous, childlike smile. Then I
would notice that his face seemed suddenly to swell
and he moved uneasily in his chair. I looked quickly
at the curate, afraid that he would notice something,
but he was intent on the cards or else was lighting
his pipe.</p>

<p class="pindent">The hour or two I spent nearly every day in that
hot, poky, smoke-laden room passed like lightning,
and as the holidays drew nearer to their end I was
seized with dismay at the thought that I must spend
the next three months dully at school.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t know what we shall do without you,”
said Mrs. Driffield. “We shall have to play dummy.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was glad that my going would break up the
game. While I was doing prep I did not want to
think that they were sitting in that little room and
enjoying themselves just as if I did not exist.</p>

<p class="pindent">“How long do you get at Easter?” asked Mr.
Galloway.</p>

<p class="pindent">“About three weeks.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“We’ll have a lovely time then,” said Mrs. Driffield.
“The weather ought to be all right. We can
ride in the mornings and then after tea we’ll play
whist. You’ve improved a lot. If we play three or
four times a week during your Easter holidays you
won’t need to be afraid to play with anybody.”</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">X</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">But the</span> term came to an end at last. I was in high
spirits when once more I got out of the train at Blackstable.
I had grown a little and I had had a new suit
made at Tercanbury, blue serge and very smart, and
I had bought a new tie. I meant to go and see the
Driffields immediately I had swallowed my tea and
I was full of hope that the carrier would have brought
my box in time for me to put the new suit on. It
made me look quite grown up. I had already begun
putting vaseline on my upper lip every night to make
my moustache grow. On my way through the town
I looked down the street in which the Driffields lived
in the hope of seeing them. I should have liked to
go in and say how-do-you-do, but I knew that Driffield
wrote in the morning and Mrs. Driffield was not
“presentable.” I had all sorts of exciting things to
tell them. I had won the hundred-yard race in the
sports and I had been second in the hurdles. I meant
to have a shot for the history prize in the summer
and I was going to swot up my English history during
the holidays. Though there was an east wind
blowing, the sky was blue and there was a feeling of
spring in the air. The High Street, with its colours
washed clean by the wind and its lines sharp as though
drawn with a new pen, looked like a picture by Samuel
Scott, quiet and naïve and cosy: now, looking
back; then it looked like nothing but High Street,
Blackstable. When I came to the railway bridge I
noticed that two or three houses were being built.</p>

<p class="pindent">“By Jove,” I said, “Lord George <span class="it">is</span> going it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">In the fields beyond little white lambs were gambolling.
The elm trees were just beginning to turn
green. I let myself in by the side door. My uncle was
sitting in his armchair by the fire reading the <span class="it">Times</span>.
I shouted to my aunt and she came downstairs, a
pink spot from the excitement of seeing me on each
of her withered cheeks, and threw her thin old arms
round my neck. She said all the right things.</p>

<p class="pindent">“How you’ve grown!” and “Good gracious me,
you’ll be getting a moustache soon!”</p>

<p class="pindent">I kissed my uncle on his bald forehead and I stood
in front of the fire, with my legs well apart and my
back to it, and was extremely grown up and rather
condescending. Then I went upstairs to say how-do-you-do
to Emily, and into the kitchen to shake hands
with Mary-Ann, and out into the garden to see the
gardener.</p>

<p class="pindent">When I sat down hungrily to dinner and my uncle
carved the leg of mutton I asked my aunt:</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, what’s happened at Blackstable since I was
here?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Nothing very much. Mrs. Greencourt went down
to Mentone for six weeks, but she came back a few
days ago. The major had an attack of gout.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And your friends the Driffields have bolted,”
added my uncle.</p>

<p class="pindent">“They’ve done what?” I cried.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Bolted. They took their luggage away one night
and just went up to London. They’ve left bills all
over the place. They hadn’t paid their rent and they
hadn’t paid for their furniture. They owed Harris
the butcher the best part of thirty pounds.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How awful,” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s bad enough,” said my aunt, “but it appears
they hadn’t even paid the wages of the maid
they had for three months.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was flabbergasted. I thought I felt a little sick.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think in future,” said my uncle, “you would
be wiser not to consort with people whom your aunt
and I don’t think proper associates for you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“One can’t help feeling sorry for all those tradesmen
they cheated,” said my aunt.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It serves them right,” said my uncle. “Fancy
giving credit to people like that! I should have
thought anyone could see they were nothing but adventurers.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I always wonder why they came down here at all.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“They just wanted to show off, and I suppose they
thought as people knew who they were here it would
be easier to get things on credit.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I did not think this quite reasonable, but was too
much crushed to argue.</p>

<p class="pindent">As soon as I had the chance I asked Mary-Ann
what she knew of the incident. To my surprise she
did not take it at all in the same way as my uncle and
aunt. She giggled.</p>

<p class="pindent">“They let everyone in proper,” she said. “They
was as free as you like with their money and everyone
though they ’ad plenty. It was always the best
end of the neck for them at the butcher’s and when
they wanted a steak nothing would do but the undercut.
Asparagus and grapes and I don’t know what
all. They ran up bills in every shop in the town. I
don’t know ’ow people can be such fools.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But it was evidently of the tradesmen she was
speaking and not of the Driffields.</p>

<p class="pindent">“But how did they manage to bunk without anyone
knowing?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, that’s what everybody’s askin’. They do say
it was Lord George ’elped them. How did they get
their boxes to the station, I ask you, if ’e didn’t take
them in that there trap of ’is?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What does he say about it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He says ’e knows no more about it than the man
in the moon. There was a rare to-do all over the
town when they found out the Driffields had shot the
moon. It made me laugh. Lord George says ’e never
knew they was broke, and ’e makes out ’e was as
surprised as anybody. But I for one don’t believe a
word of it. We all knew about ’im and Rosie before
she was married, and between you and me and the
gatepost I don’t know that it ended there. They do
say they was seen walkin’ about the fields together
last summer and ’e was in and out of the ’ouse pretty
near every day.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How did people find out?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, it’s like this. They ’ad a girl there and
they told ’er she could go ’ome and spend the night
with her mother, but she wasn’t to be back later
than eight o’clock in the morning. Well, when she
come back she couldn’t get in. She knocked and she
rung but nobody answered, and so she went in next
door and asked the lady there what she’d better do,
and the lady said she’d better go to the police station.
The sergeant come back with ’er and ’e knocked
and ’e rung, but ’<span class="it">e</span> couldn’t get no answer. Then he
asked the girl ’ad they paid ’er ’er wages, and she
said no, not for three months, and then ’e said, you
take my word for it, they’ve shot the moon, that’s
what they’ve done. An’ when they come to get inside
they found they’d took all their clothes, an’ their
books—they say as Ted Driffield ’ad a rare lot of
books—an’ every blessed thing that belonged to
them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And has nothing been heard of them since?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, not exactly, but when they’d been gone
about a week the girl got a letter from London, and
when she opened it there was no letter or anything,
but just a postal order for ’er wages. An’ if you ask
me, I call that very ’andsome not to do a poor girl
out of her wages.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was much more shocked than Mary-Ann. I was
a very respectable youth. The reader cannot have
failed to observe that I accepted the conventions of
my class as if they were the laws of Nature, and
though debts on the grand scale in books had seemed
to me romantic, and duns and money lenders were
familiar figures to my fancy, I could not but think
it mean and paltry not to pay the tradesmen’s books.
I listened with confusion when people talked in my
presence of the Driffields, and when they spoke of
them as my friends I said: “Hang it all, I just knew
them”; and when they asked: “Weren’t they fearfully
common?” I said: “Well, after all they didn’t
exactly suggest the Vere de Veres, you know.” Poor
Mr. Galloway was dreadfully upset.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course I didn’t think they were wealthy,” he
told me, “but I thought they had enough to get along.
The house was very nicely furnished and the piano
was new. It never struck me that they hadn’t paid for
a single thing. They never stinted themselves. What
hurts me is the deceit. I used to see quite a lot of
them and I thought they liked me. They always made
one welcome. You’d hardly believe it, but the last
time I saw them when they shook hands with me
Mrs. Driffield asked me to come next day and Driffield
said: ‘Muffins for tea to-morrow.’ And all the
time they had everything packed upstairs and that
very night they took the last train to London.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What does Lord George say about it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“To tell you the truth I haven’t gone out of my
way to see him lately. It’s been a lesson to me. There’s
a little proverb about evil communications which I’ve
thought well to bear in mind.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I felt very much the same about Lord George, and
I was a little nervous, too. If he took it into his head
to tell people that at Christmas I had been going to
see the Driffields almost every day, and it came to
my uncle’s ears, I foresaw an unpleasant fuss. My
uncle would accuse me of deceit and prevarication
and disobedience and of not behaving like a gentleman,
and I did not at the moment see what answer
I could make. I knew him well enough to be aware
that he would not let the matter drop, and that I
should be reminded of my transgression for years.
I was just as glad not to see Lord George. But one
day I ran into him face to face in the High Street.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Hulloa, youngster,” he cried, addressing me in
a way I particularly resented. “Back for the holidays,
I suppose.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You suppose quite correctly,” I answered with
what I thought withering sarcasm.</p>

<p class="pindent">Unfortunately he only bellowed with laughter.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re so sharp you’ll cut yourself if you don’t
look out,” he answered heartily. “Well, it looks as
if there was no more whist for you and me just yet.
Now you see what comes of living beyond your
means. What I always say to my boys is, if you’ve
got a pound and you spend nineteen and six you’re
a rich man, but if you spend twenty shillings and sixpence
you’re a pauper. Look after the pence, young
fellow, and the pounds’ll look after themselves.”</p>

<p class="pindent">But though he spoke after this fashion there was
in his voice no note of disapproval, but a bubble of
laughter as though in his heart he were tittering at
these admirable maxims.</p>

<p class="pindent">“They say you helped them to bunk,” I remarked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Me?” His face assumed a look of extreme surprise,
but his eyes glittered with sly mirth. “Why,
when they came and told me the Driffields had shot
the moon you could have knocked me down with a
feather. They owed me four pounds seventeen and six
for coal. We’ve all been let in, even poor old Galloway
who never got his muffins for tea.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I had never thought Lord George more blatant.
I should have liked to say something final and crushing,
but as I could not think of anything I just said
that I must be getting along and with a curt nod left
him.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XI</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">Musing</span> thus over the past, while I waited for Alroy
Kear, I chuckled when I considered this shabby incident
of Edward Driffield’s obscurity in the light of
the immense respectability of his later years. I wondered
whether it was because, in my boyhood, he was
as a writer held in such small esteem by the people
about me that I had never been able to see in him
the astonishing merit that the best critical opinion
eventually ascribed to him. He was for long thought
to write very bad English, and indeed he gave you
the impression of writing with the stub of a blunt
pencil; his style was laboured, an uneasy mixture
of the classical and the slangy, and his dialogue
was such as could never have issued from the mouth
of a human being. Toward the end of his career,
when he dictated his books, his style, acquiring a
conversational ease, became flowing and limpid; and
then the critics, going back to the novels of his
maturity, found that their English had a nervous,
racy vigour that eminently suited the matter. His
prime belonged to a period when the purple patch
was in vogue and there are descriptive passages in
his works that have found their way into all the
anthologies of English prose. His pieces on the sea,
and spring in the Kentish woods, and sunset on the
lower reaches of the Thames are famous. It should
be a mortification to me that I cannot read them without
discomfort.</p>

<p class="pindent">When I was a young man, though his books sold
but little and one or two were banned by the libraries,
it was very much a mark of culture to admire them.
He was thought boldly realistic. He was a very good
stick to beat the Philistines with. Somebody’s lucky
inspiration discovered that his sailors and peasants
were Shakespearean, and when the advanced got together
they uttered shrill cries of ecstasy over the
dry and spicy humour of his yokels. This was a commodity
that Edward Driffield had no difficulty in supplying.
My own heart sank when he led me into the
forecastle of a sailing ship or the taproom of a public
house and I knew I was in for half a dozen pages
in dialect of facetious comment on life, ethics, and
immortality. But, I admit, I have always thought the
Shakespearean clowns tedious and their innumerable
progeny insupportable.</p>

<p class="pindent">Driffield’s strength lay evidently in his depiction
of the class he knew best, farmers and farm labourers,
shopkeepers and bartenders, skippers of sailing
ships, mates, cooks, and able seamen. When he introduces
characters belonging to a higher station in
life even his warmest admirers, one would have
thought, must experience a certain malaise; his fine
gentlemen are so incredibly fine, his high-born ladies
are so good, so pure, so noble that you are not surprised
that they can only express themselves with
polysyllabic dignity. His women difficultly come to
life. But here again I must add that this is only my
own opinion; the world at large and the most eminent
critics have agreed that they are very winsome
types of English womanhood, spirited, gallant, high-souled,
and they have been often compared with
the heroines of Shakespeare. We know of course
that women are habitually constipated, but to represent
them in fiction as being altogether devoid
of a back passage seems to me really an excess of
chivalry. I am surprised that they care to see themselves
thus limned.</p>

<p class="pindent">The critics can force the world to pay attention
to a very indifferent writer, and the world may lose
its head over one who has no merit at all, but the
result in neither case is lasting; and I cannot help
thinking that no writer can hold the public for as
long as Edward Driffield without considerable gifts.
The elect sneer at popularity; they are inclined
even to assert that it is a proof of mediocrity; but
they forget that posterity makes its choice not from
among the unknown writers of a period, but from
among the known. It may be that some great masterpiece
which deserves immortality has fallen still-born
from the press, but posterity will never hear of it; it
may be that posterity will scrap all the best sellers
of our day, but it is among them that it must choose.
At all events Edward Driffield is in the running. His
novels happen to bore me; I find them long; the
melodramatic incidents with which he sought to stir
the sluggish reader’s interest leave me cold; but he
certainly had sincerity. There is in his best books
the stir of life, and in none of them can you fail to
be aware of the author’s enigmatic personality. In his
earlier days he was praised or blamed for his realism;
according to the idiosyncrasy of his critics he
was extolled for his truth or censured for his coarseness.
But realism has ceased to excite remark, and
the library reader will take in his stride obstacles at
which a generation back he would have violently
shied. The cultured reader of these pages will remember
the leading article in the Literary Supplement
of the <span class="it">Times</span> which appeared at the moment of
Driffield’s death. Taking the novels of Edward Driffield
as his text, the author wrote what was very
well described as a hymn to beauty. No one who read
it could fail to be impressed by those swelling periods,
which reminded one of the noble prose of Jeremy
Taylor, by that reverence and piety, by all those
high sentiments, in short, expressed in a style that
was ornate without excess and dulcet without effeminacy.
It was itself a thing of beauty. If some
suggested that Edward Driffield was by way of being
a humourist and that a jest would here and there
have lightened this eulogious article it must be replied
that after all it was a funeral oration. And it
is well known that Beauty does not look with a good
grace on the timid advances of Humour. Roy Kear,
when he was talking to me of Driffield, claimed that,
whatever his faults, they were redeemed by the
beauty that suffused his pages. Now I come to look
back on our conversation, I think it was this remark
that had most exasperated me.</p>

<p class="pindent">Thirty years ago in literary circles God was all
the fashion. It was good form to believe and journalists
used him to adorn a phrase or balance a sentence;
then God went out (oddly enough with cricket
and beer) and Pan came in. In a hundred novels his
cloven hoof left its imprint on the sward; poets saw
him lurking in the twilight on London commons, and
literary ladies in Surrey and New England, nymphs
of an industrial age, mysteriously surrendered their
virginity to his rough embrace. Spiritually they were
never the same again. But Pan went out and now
beauty has taken his place. People find it in a phrase,
or a turbot, a dog, a day, a picture, an action, a dress.
Young women in cohorts, each of whom has written
so promising and competent a novel, prattle of it
in every manner from allusive to arch, from intense
to charming; and the young men, more or less recently
down from Oxford, but still trailing its clouds
of glory, who tell us in the weekly papers what we
should think of art, life, and the universe, fling the
word with a pretty negligence about their close-packed
pages. It is sadly frayed. Gosh, they have
worked it hard! The ideal has many names and beauty
is but one of them. I wonder if this clamour is anything
more than the cry of distress of those who cannot
make themselves at home in our heroic world of
machines, and I wonder if their passion for beauty,
the Little Nell of this shamefaced day, is anything
more than sentimentality. It may be that another
generation, accommodating itself more adequately
to the stress of life, will look for inspiration not in a
flight from reality, but in an eager acceptance of it.</p>

<p class="pindent">I do not know if others are like myself, but I am
conscious that I cannot contemplate beauty long. For
me no poet made a falser statement than Keats when
he wrote the first line of <span class="it">Endymion</span>. When the thing
of beauty has given me the magic of its sensation my
mind quickly wanders; I listen with incredulity to
the persons who tell me that they can look with rapture
for hours at a view or a picture. Beauty is an
ecstasy; it is as simple as hunger. There is really
nothing to be said about it. It is like the perfume of
a rose: you can smell it and that is all: that is why
the criticism of art, except in so far as it is unconcerned
with beauty and therefore with art, is tiresome.
All the critic can tell you with regard to
Titian’s Entombment of Christ, perhaps of all the
pictures in the world that which has most pure
beauty, is to go and look at it. What else he has to
say is history, or biography, or what not. But people
add other qualities to beauty—sublimity, human interest,
tenderness, love—because beauty does not
long content them. Beauty is perfect, and perfection
(such is human nature) holds our attention but for
a little while. The mathematician who after seeing
Phèdre asked: “<span class="it">Qu’est-ce que ça prouve?</span>” was not
such a fool as he has been generally made out. No
one has ever been able to explain why the Doric
temple of Pæstum is more beautiful than a glass of
cold beer except by bringing in considerations that
have nothing to do with beauty. Beauty is a blind
alley. It is a mountain peak which once reached leads
nowhere. That is why in the end we find more to entrance
us in El Greco than in Titian, in the incomplete
achievement of Shakespeare than in the consummate
success of Racine. Too much has been
written about beauty. That is why I have written a
little more. Beauty is that which satisfies the æsthetic
instinct. But who wants to be satisfied? It is only to
the dullard that enough is as good as a feast. Let us
face it: beauty is a bit of a bore.</p>

<p class="pindent">But of course what the critics wrote about Edward
Driffield was eye-wash. His outstanding merit was
not the realism that gave vigour to his work, nor
the beauty that informed it, nor his graphic portraits
of seafaring men, nor his poetic descriptions of salty
marshes, of storm and calm and of nestling hamlets;
it was his longevity. Reverence for old age is
one of the most admirable traits of the human race
and I think it may safely be stated that in no other
country than ours is this trait more marked. The awe
and love with which other nations regard old age is
often platonic; but ours is practical. Who but the
English would fill Covent Garden to listen to an
aged prima donna without a voice? Who but the
English would pay to see a dancer so decrepit that he
can hardly put one foot before the other and say to
one another admiringly in the intervals: “By George,
sir, d’you know he’s a long way past sixty?” But
compared with politicians and writers these are but
striplings, and I often think that a <span class="it">jeune premier</span> must
be of a singularly amiable disposition if it does not
make him bitter to consider that when at the age of
seventy he must end his career the public man and the
author are only at their prime. A man who is a politician
at forty is a statesman at three score and ten.
It is at this age, when he would be too old to be a
clerk or a gardener or a police-court magistrate, that
he is ripe to govern a country. This is not so strange
when you reflect that from the earliest times the old
have rubbed it into the young that they are wiser than
they, and before the young had discovered what nonsense
this was they were old too, and it profited them
to carry on the imposture; and besides, no one can
have moved in the society of politicians without discovering
that (if one may judge by results) it requires
little mental ability to rule a nation. But why
writers should be more esteemed the older they grow,
has long perplexed me. At one time I thought that
the praise accorded to authors when they had ceased
for twenty years to write anything of interest was
largely due to the fact that the younger men, having
no longer to fear their competition, felt it safe to
extol their merit; and it is well known that to praise
someone whose rivalry you do not dread is often a
very good way of putting a spoke in the wheel of
someone whose rivalry you do. But this is to take a
low view of human nature and I would not for the
world lay myself open to a charge of cheap cynicism.
After mature consideration I have come to the conclusion
that the real reason for the universal applause
that comforts the declining years of the author who
exceeds the common span of man is that intelligent
people after the age of thirty read nothing at all. As
they grow older the books they read in their youth are
lit with its glamour and with every year that passes
they ascribe greater merit to the author that wrote
them. Of course he must go on; he must keep in the
public eye. It is no good his thinking that it is enough
to write one or two masterpieces; he must provide a
pedestal for them of forty or fifty works of no particular
consequence. This needs time. His production
must be such that if he cannot captivate a reader by
his charm he can stun him by his weight.</p>

<p class="pindent">If, as I think, longevity is genius, few in our time
have enjoyed it in a more conspicuous degree than
Edward Driffield. When he was a young fellow in
the sixties (the cultured having had their way with
him and passed him by) his position in the world of
letters was only respectable; the best judges praised
him, but with moderation; the younger men were
inclined to be frivolous at his expense. It was agreed
that he had talent, but it never occurred to anyone
that he was one of the glories of English literature.
He celebrated his seventieth birthday; an uneasiness
passed over the world of letters, like a ruffling
of the waters when on an Eastern sea a typhoon
lurks in the distance, and it grew evident that there
had lived among us all these years a great novelist
and none of us had suspected it. There was a rush
for Driffield’s book in the various libraries and a
hundred busy pens, in Bloomsbury, in Chelsea, and
in other places where men of letters congregate,
wrote appreciations, studies, essays, and works, short
and chatty or long and intense, on his novels. These
were reprinted, in complete editions, in select editions,
at a shilling and three and six and five shillings
and a guinea. His style was analyzed, his philosophy
was examined, his technique was dissected. At
seventy-five everyone agreed that Edward Driffield
had genius. At eighty he was the Grand Old Man of
English Letters. This position he held till his death.</p>

<p class="pindent">Now we look about and think sadly that there is
no one to take his place. A few septuagenarians are
sitting up and taking notice, and they evidently feel
that they could comfortably fill the vacant niche. But
it is obvious that they lack something.</p>

<p class="pindent">Though these recollections have taken so long to
narrate they took but a little while to pass through
my head. They came to me higgledy-piggledy, an
incident and then a scrap of conversation that belonged
to a previous time, and I have set them down
in order for the convenience of the reader and because
I have a neat mind. One thing that surprised
me was that even at that far distance I could remember
distinctly what people looked like and even
the gist of what they said, but only with vagueness
what they wore. I knew of course that the dress,
especially of women, was quite different forty years
ago from what it was now, but if I recalled it at all
it was not from life but from pictures and photographs
that I had seen much later.</p>

<p class="pindent">I was still occupied with my idle fancies when I
heard a taxi stop at the door, the bell ring, and in a
moment Alroy Kear’s booming voice telling the butler
that he had an appointment with me. He came in,
big, bluff, and hearty; his vitality shattered with a
single gesture the frail construction I had been building
out of the vanished past. He brought in with
him, like a blustering wind in March, the aggressive
and inescapable present.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I was just asking myself,” I said, “who could
possibly succeed Edward Driffield as the Grand Old
Man of English Letters and you arrive to answer my
question.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He broke into a jovial laugh, but into his eyes
came a quick look of suspicion.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t think there’s anybody,” he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“How about yourself?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, my dear boy, I’m not fifty yet. Give me another
twenty-five years.” He laughed, but his eyes
held mine keenly. “I never know when you’re pulling
my leg.” He looked down suddenly. “Of course one
can’t help thinking about the future sometimes. All
the people who are at the top of the tree now are
anything from fifteen to twenty years older than me.
They can’t last for ever, and when they’re gone who
is there? Of course there’s Aldous; he’s a good deal
younger than me, but he’s not very strong and I don’t
believe he takes great care of himself. Barring accidents,
by which I mean barring some genius who
suddenly springs up and sweeps the board, I don’t
quite see how in another twenty or twenty-five years
I can help having the field pretty well to myself. It’s
just a question of pegging away and living on longer
than the others.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy sank his virile bulk into one of my landlady’s
armchairs and I offered him a whisky and soda.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, I never drink spirits before six o’clock,” he
said. He looked about him. “Jolly, these digs are.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I know. What have you come to see me about?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I thought I’d better have a little chat with you
about Mrs. Driffield’s invitation. It was rather difficult
to explain over the telephone. The truth of the
matter is that I’ve arranged to write Driffield’s life.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh! Why didn’t you tell me the other day?”</p>

<p class="pindent">I felt friendly disposed toward Roy. I was happy
to think that I had not misjudged him when I suspected
that it was not merely for the pleasure of my
company that he had asked me to luncheon.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hadn’t entirely made up my mind. Mrs. Driffield
is very keen on my doing it. She’s going to help me
in every way she can. She’s giving me all the material
she has. She’s been collecting it for a good
many years. It’s not an easy thing to do and of course
I can’t afford not to do it well. But if I can make a
pretty good job of it, it can’t fail to do me a lot of
good. People have so much more respect for a novelist
if he writes something serious now and then. Those
critical works of mine were an awful sweat, and they
sold nothing, but I don’t regret them for a moment.
They’ve given me a position I could never have got
without them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think it’s a very good plan. You’ve known Driffield
more intimately than most people for the last
twenty years.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think I have. But of course he was over sixty
when I first made his acquaintance. I wrote and told
him how much I admired his books and he asked me
to go and see him. But I know nothing about the
early part of his life. Mrs. Driffield used to try to
get him to talk about those days and she made very
copious notes of all he said, and then there are diaries
that he kept now and then, and of course a lot of
the stuff in the novels is obviously autobiographical.
But there are immense lacunæ. I’ll tell you the sort
of book I want to write, a sort of intimate life, with
a lot of those little details that make people feel warm
inside, you know, and then woven in with this a
really exhaustive criticism of his literary work, not
ponderous, of course, but although sympathetic,
searching and . . . subtle. Naturally it wants doing,
but Mrs. Driffield seems to think I can do it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m sure you can,” I put in.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t see why not,” said Roy. “I am a critic,
and I’m a novelist. It’s obvious that I have certain
literary qualifications. But I can’t do anything unless
everyone who can is willing to help me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I began to see where I came in. I tried to make
my face look quite blank. Roy leaned forward.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I asked you the other day if you were going to
write anything about Driffield yourself and you said
you weren’t. Can I take that as definite?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Certainly.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then have you got any objection to giving me
your material?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“My dear boy, I haven’t got any.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, that’s nonsense,” said Roy good-humouredly,
with the tone of a doctor who is trying to persuade
a child to have its throat examined. “When he was
living at Blackstable you must have seen a lot of
him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I was only a boy then.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But you must have been conscious of the unusual
experience. After all, no one could be for half an
hour in Edward Driffield’s society without being impressed
by his extraordinary personality. It must
have been obvious even to a boy of sixteen, and you
were probably more observant and sensitive than the
average boy of that age.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wonder if his personality would have seemed
extraordinary without the reputation to back it up.
Do you imagine that if you went down to a spa in
the west of England as Mr. Atkins, a chartered
accountant taking the waters for his liver, you would
impress the people you met there as a man of immense
character?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I imagine they’d soon realize that I was not quite
the common or garden chartered accountant,” said
Roy, with a smile that took from his remark any appearance
of self-esteem.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, all I can tell you is that what chiefly bothered
me about Driffield in those days was that the
knickerbocker suit he wore was dreadfully loud. We
used to bicycle a lot together and it always made me
feel a trifle uncomfortable to be seen with him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It sounds comic now. What did he talk about?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t know; nothing very much. He was rather
keen on architecture, and he talked about farming,
and if a pub looked nice he generally suggested stopping
for five minutes and having a glass of bitter,
and then he would talk to the landlord about the
crops and the price of coal and things like that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I rambled on, though I could see by the look of
Roy’s face that he was disappointed with me; he
listened, but he was a trifle bored, and it struck me
that when he was bored he looked peevish. But
though I couldn’t remember that Driffield had ever
said anything significant during those long rides of
ours, I had a very acute recollection of the <span class="it">feel</span> of
them. Blackstable was peculiar in this, that though
it was on the sea, with a long shingly beach and
marshland at the back, you had only to go about
half a mile inland to come into the most rural country
in Kent. Winding roads that ran between the great
fat green fields and clumps of huge elms, substantial
and with a homely stateliness like good old Kentish
farmers’ wives, high-coloured and robust, who had
grown portly on good butter and home-made bread
and cream and fresh eggs. And sometimes the road
was only a lane, with thick hawthorn hedges, and the
green elms overhung it on either side so that when
you looked up there was only a strip of blue sky between.
And as you rode along in the warm, keen air
you had a sensation that the world was standing still
and life would last for ever. Although you were
pedalling with such energy you had a delicious feeling
of laziness. You were quite happy when no one
spoke, and if one of the party from sheer high spirits
suddenly put on speed and shot ahead it was a joke
that everyone laughed at and for a few minutes you
pedalled as hard as you could. And we chaffed one
another innocently and giggled at our own humour.
Now and then one would pass cottages with little
gardens in front of them and in the gardens were
hollyhocks and tiger lilies; and a little way from
the road were farmhouses, with their spacious barns
and oasthouses; and one would pass through hopfields
with the ripening hops hanging in garlands.
The public houses were friendly and informal, hardly
more important than cottages, and on the porches
often honeysuckle would be growing. The names they
bore were usual and familiar: the Jolly Sailor, the
Merry Ploughman, the Crown and Anchor, the Red
Lion.</p>

<p class="pindent">But of course all that could matter nothing to
Roy, and he interrupted me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Did he never talk of literature?” he asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t think so. He wasn’t that sort of writer. I
suppose he thought about his writing, but he never
mentioned it. He used to lend the curate books. In
the winter, one Christmas holidays, I used to have
tea at his house nearly every day and sometimes the
curate and he would talk about books, but we used
to shut them up.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you remember anything he said?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Only one thing. I remember it because I hadn’t
ever read the things he was talking about and what
he said made me do so. He said that when Shakespeare
retired to Stratford-on-Avon and became respectable,
if he ever thought of his plays at all, probably
the two that he remembered with most interest
were <span class="it">Measure for Measure</span> and <span class="it">Troilus and Cressida</span>.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t think that’s very illuminating. Didn’t he
say anything about anyone more modern than
Shakespeare?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, not then, that I can remember; but when
I was lunching with the Driffields a few years ago I
overheard him saying that Henry James had turned
his back on one of the great events of the world’s
history, the rise of the United States, in order to
report tittle-tattle at tea parties in English country
houses. Driffield called it <span class="it">il gran rifiuto</span>. I was surprised
at hearing the old man use an Italian phrase
and amused because a great big bouncing duchess who
was there was the only person who knew what the
devil he was talking about. He said: ‘Poor Henry,
he’s spending eternity wandering round and round
a stately park and the fence is just too high for him
to peep over and they’re having tea just too far for
him to hear what the countess is saying.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy listened to my little anecdote with attention.
He shook his head reflectively.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t think I could use that. I’d have the
Henry James gang down on me like a thousand of
bricks. . . . But what used you to do during those
evenings?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, we played whist while Driffield read books
for review, and he used to sing.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s interesting,” said Roy, leaning forward
eagerly. “Do you remember what he sang?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Perfectly. ‘All Through Stickin’ to a Soljer’ and
‘Come Where the Booze Is Cheaper’ were his favourites.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh!”</p>

<p class="pindent">I could see that Roy was disappointed.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Did you expect him to sing Schumann?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t know why not. It would have been rather
a good point. But I think I should have expected him
to sing sea chanteys or old English country airs, you
know, the sort of thing they used to sing at fairings—blind
fiddlers and the village swains dancing with the
girls on the threshing floor and all that sort of thing.
I might have made something rather beautiful out
of that, but I can’t <span class="it">see</span> Edward Driffield singing
music hall songs. After all, when you’re drawing a
man’s portrait you must get the values right; you
only confuse the impression if you put in stuff that’s
all out of tone.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You know that shortly after this he shot the moon.
He let everybody in.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy was silent for fully a minute and he looked
down at the carpet reflectively.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I knew there’d been some unpleasantness.
Mrs. Driffield mentioned it. I understand everything
was paid up later before he finally bought Ferne
Court and settled down in the district. I don’t think
it’s necessary to dwell on an incident that is not really
of any importance in the history of his development.
After all, it happened nearly forty years ago. You
know, there were some very curious sides to the old
man. One would have thought that after a rather
sordid little scandal like that the neighbourhood of
Blackstable would be the last place he’d choose to
spend the rest of his life in when he’d become celebrated,
especially when it was the scene of his rather
humble origins; but he didn’t seem to mind a bit.
He seemed to think the whole thing rather a good
joke. He was quite capable of telling people who
came to lunch about it and it was very embarrassing
for Mrs. Driffield. I should like you to know Amy
better. She’s a very remarkable woman. Of course
the old man had written all his great books before
he ever set eyes on her, but I don’t think anyone can
deny that it was she who created the rather imposing
and dignified figure that the world saw for the last
twenty-five years of his life. She’s been very frank
with me. She didn’t have such an easy job of it. Old
Driffield had some very queer ways and she had to
use a good deal of tact to get him to behave decently.
He was very obstinate in some things and I think a
woman of less character would have been discouraged.
For instance, he had a habit that poor Amy
had a lot of trouble to break him of: after he’d finished
his meat and vegetables he’d take a piece of
bread and wipe the plate clean with it and eat it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do you know what that means?” I said. “It means
that for long he had so little to eat that he couldn’t
afford to waste any food he could get.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, that may be, but it’s not a very pretty habit
for a distinguished man of letters. And then, he
didn’t exactly tipple, but he was rather fond of going
down to the Bear and Key at Blackstable and having
a few beers in the public bar. Of course there was
no harm in it, but it did make him rather conspicuous,
especially in summer when the place was full
of trippers. He didn’t mind who he talked to. He
didn’t seem able to realize that he had a position to
keep up. You can’t deny it was rather awkward after
they’d been having a lot of interesting people to
lunch—people like Edmund Gosse, for instance, and
Lord Curzon—that he should go down to a public
house and tell the plumber and the baker and the
sanitary inspector what he thought about them. But
of course that could be explained away. One could
say that he was after local colour and was interested
in types. But he had some habits that really were
rather difficult to cope with. Do you know that it
was with the greatest difficulty that Amy Driffield
could ever get him to take a bath?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He was born at a time when people thought it
unhealthy to take too many baths. I don’t suppose
he ever lived in a house that had a bathroom till he
was fifty.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, he said he never had had a bath more than
once a week and he didn’t see why he should change
his habits at his time of life. Then Amy said that he
must change his under linen every day, but he objected
to that too. He said he’d always been used
to wearing his vest and drawers for a week and it
was nonsense, it only wore them out to have them
washed so often. Mrs. Driffield did everything she
could to tempt him to have a bath every day, with
bath salts and perfumes, you know, but nothing
would induce him to, and as he grew older he wouldn’t
even have one once a week. She tells me that for
the last three years of his life he never had a bath
at all. Of course, all this is between ourselves; I’m
merely telling it to show you that in writing his life
I shall have to use a good deal of tact. I don’t see
how one can deny that he was just a wee bit unscrupulous
in money matters and he had a kink in him
that made him take a strange pleasure in the society
of his inferiors and some of his personal habits were
rather disagreeable, but I don’t think that side of
him was the most significant. I don’t want to say anything
that’s untrue, but I do think there’s a certain
amount that’s better left unsaid.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you think it would be more interesting if
you went the whole hog and drew him warts and
all?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I couldn’t. Amy Driffield would never speak
to me again. She only asked me to do the life because
she felt she could trust my discretion. I must
behave like a gentleman.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s very hard to be a gentleman and a writer.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t see why. And besides, you know what the
critics are. If you tell the truth they only say you’re
cynical and it does an author no good to get a reputation
for cynicism. Of course I don’t deny that if I
were thoroughly unscrupulous I could make a sensation.
It would be rather amusing to show the man
with his passion for beauty and his careless treatment
of his obligations, his fine style and his personal
hatred for soap and water, his idealism and his tippling
in disreputable pubs; but honestly, would it
pay? They’d only say I was imitating Lytton Strachey.
No, I think I shall do much better to be allusive
and charming and rather subtle, you know the sort
of thing, and tender. I think one ought always to
<span class="it">see</span> a book before one starts it. Well, I see this rather
like a portrait of Van Dyck, with a good deal of
atmosphere, you know, and a certain gravity, and
with a sort of aristocratic distinction. Do you know
what I mean? About eighty thousand words.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He was absorbed for a moment in the ecstasy of
æsthetic contemplation. In his mind’s eye he saw a
book, in royal octavo, slim and light in the hand,
printed with large margins on handsome paper in
a type that was both clear and comely, and I think
he saw a binding in smooth black cloth with a decoration
in gold and gilt lettering. But being human,
Alroy Kear could not, as I suggested a few pages
back, hold the ecstasy that beauty yields for more
than a little while. He gave me a candid smile.</p>

<p class="pindent">“But how the devil am I to get over the first Mrs.
Driffield?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The skeleton in the cupboard,” I murmured.</p>

<p class="pindent">“She is damned awkward to deal with. She was
married to Driffield for a good many years. Amy
has very decided views on the subject, but I don’t see
how I can possibly meet them. You see, her attitude
is that Rose Driffield exerted a most pernicious influence
on her husband, and that she did everything
possible to ruin him morally, physically, and financially;
she was beneath him in every way, at least
intellectually and spiritually, and it was only because
he was a man of immense force and vitality that he
survived. It was of course a very unfortunate marriage.
It’s true that she’s been dead for ages and
it seems a pity to rake up old scandals and wash a
lot of dirty linen in public; but the fact remains that
all Driffield’s greatest books were written when he
was living with her. Much as I admire the later
books, and no one is more conscious of their genuine
beauty than I am, and they have a restraint and a
sort of classical sobriety which are admirable, I must
admit that they haven’t the tang and the vigour and
the smell and bustle of life of the early ones. It does
seem to me that you can’t altogether ignore the influence
his first wife had on his work.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What are you going to do about it?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I can’t see why all that part of his life
shouldn’t be treated with the greatest possible reserve
and delicacy, so as not to offend the most exacting
susceptibility, and yet with a sort of manly
frankness, if you understand what I mean, that would
be rather moving.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It sounds a very tall order.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“As I see it, there’s no need to dot the i’s or to
cross the t’s. It can only be a question of getting
just the right touch. I wouldn’t state more than I
could help, but I would suggest what was essential
for the reader to realize. You know, however gross
a subject is you can soften its unpleasantness if you
treat it with dignity. But I can do nothing unless I
am in complete possession of the facts.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Obviously you can’t cook them unless you have
them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy had been expressing himself with a fluent ease
that revealed the successful lecturer. I wished (a)
that I could express myself with so much force and
aptness, never at a loss for a word, rolling off the
sentences without a moment’s hesitation; and (b)
that I did not feel so miserably incompetent with my
one small insignificant person to represent the large
and appreciative audience that Roy was instinctively
addressing. But now he paused. A genial look came
over his face, which his enthusiasm had reddened and
the heat of the day caused to perspire, and the eyes
that had held me with a dominating brilliance softened
and smiled.</p>

<p class="pindent">“This is where you come in, old boy,” he said
pleasantly.</p>

<p class="pindent">I have always found it a very good plan in life to
say nothing when I had nothing to say and when I
do not know how to answer a remark to hold my
tongue. I remained silent and looked back at Roy
amiably.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You know more about his life at Blackstable than
anybody else.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t know about that. There must be a number
of people at Blackstable who saw as much of
him in the old days as I did.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That may be, but after all they’re presumably
not people of any importance, and I don’t think they
matter very much.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I see. You mean that I’m the only person
who might blow the gaff.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Roughly, that is what I do mean, if you feel that
you must put it in a facetious way.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I saw that Roy was not inclined to be amused. I
was not annoyed, for I am quite used to people not
being amused at my jokes. I often think that the
purest type of the artist is the humorist who laughs
alone at his own jests.</p>

<p class="pindent">“And you saw a good deal of him later on in London,
I believe.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That is when he had an apartment somewhere in
Lower Belgravia.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, lodgings in Pimlico.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy smiled drily.</p>

<p class="pindent">“We won’t quarrel about the exact designation
of the quarter of London in which he lived. You
were very intimate with him then.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Fairly.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How long did that last?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“About a couple of years.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How old were you then?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Twenty.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Now look here, I want you to do me a great
favour. It won’t take you very long and it will be of
quite inestimable value to me. I want you to jot down
as fully as you can all your recollections of Driffield,
and all you remember about his wife and his relations
with her and so on, both at Blackstable and in
London.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, my dear fellow, that’s asking a great deal.
I’ve got a lot of work to do just now.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It needn’t take you very long. You can write it
quite roughly, I mean. You needn’t bother about
style, you know, or anything like that. I’ll put the
style in. All I want are the facts. After all, you
know them and nobody else does. I don’t want to be
pompous or anything like that, but Driffield was a
great man and you owe it to his memory and to English
literature to tell everything you know. I shouldn’t
have asked you, but you told me the other day that
you weren’t going to write anything about him yourself.
It would be rather like a dog in a manger to
keep to yourself a whole lot of material that you
have no intention of using.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Thus Roy appealed at once to my sense of duty, my
indolence, my generosity, and my rectitude.</p>

<p class="pindent">“But why does Mrs. Driffield want me to go down
and stay at Ferne Court?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, we talked it over. It’s a very jolly house to
stay in. She does one very well, and it ought to be
divine in the country just now. She thought it would
be very nice and quiet for you if you felt inclined to
write your recollections there; of course, I said I
couldn’t promise that, but naturally being so near
Blackstable would remind you of all sorts of things
that you might otherwise forget. And then, living in
his house, among his books and things, it would make
the past seem much more real. We could all talk
about him, and you know how in the heat of conversation
things come back. Amy’s very quick and
clever. She’s been in the habit of making notes of
Driffield’s talk for years, and after all it’s quite
likely that you’ll say things on the spur of the moment
that you wouldn’t think of writing and she can
just jot them down afterward. And we can play
tennis and bathe.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m not very fond of staying with people,” I said.
“I hate getting up for a nine-o’clock breakfast to eat
things I have no mind to. I don’t like going for walks,
and I’m not interested in other people’s chickens.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She’s a lonely woman now. It would be a kindness
to her and it would be a kindness to me too.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I reflected.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll tell you what I’ll do: I’ll go down to Blackstable,
but I’ll go down on my own. I’ll put up at
the Bear and Key and I’ll come over and see Mrs.
Driffield while you’re there. You can both talk your
heads off about Edward Driffield, but I shall be able
to get away when I’m fed up with you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy laughed good-naturedly.</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right. That’ll do. And will you jot down anything
you can remember that you think will be useful
to me?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll try.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“When will you come? I’m going down on Friday.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll come with you if you’ll promise not to talk
to me in the train.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right. The five-ten’s the best one. Shall I come
and fetch you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m capable of getting to Victoria by myself. I’ll
meet you on the platform.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I don’t know if Roy was afraid of my changing my
mind, but he got up at once, shook my hand heartily,
and left. He begged me on no account to forget my
tennis racket and bathing suit.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XII</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">My promise</span> to Roy sent my thoughts back to my
first years in London. Having nothing much to do
that afternoon, it occurred to me to stroll along and
have a cup of tea with my old landlady. Mrs. Hudson’s
name had been given to me by the secretary of
the medical school at St. Luke’s when, a callow youth
just arrived in town, I was looking for lodgings. She
had a house in Vincent Square. I lived there for five
years, in two rooms on the ground floor, and over
me on the drawing room floor lived a master at Westminster
School. I paid a pound a week for my rooms
and he paid twenty-five shillings. Mrs. Hudson was
a little, active, bustling woman, with a sallow face,
a large aquiline nose, and the brightest, the most
vivacious, black eyes that I ever saw. She had a great
deal of very dark hair, in the afternoons and all day
on Sunday arranged in a fringe on the forehead with
a bun at the nape of the neck as you may see in old
photographs of the Jersey Lily. She had a heart of
gold (though I did not know it then, for when you
are young you take the kindness people show you as
your right) and she was an excellent cook. No one
could make a better <span class="it">omelette soufflée</span> than she. Every
morning she was up betimes to get the fire lit in her
gentlemen’s sitting room so that they needn’t eat
their breakfasts simply perishing with the cold, my
word it’s bitter this morning; and if she didn’t hear
you having your bath, a flat tin bath that slipped
under the bed, the water put in the night before to
take the chill off, she’d say: “There now, there’s my
dining room floor not up yet, ’e’ll be late for his
lecture again,” and she would come tripping upstairs
and thump on the door and you would hear her shrill
voice: “If you don’t get up at once you won’t ’ave
time to ’ave breakfast, an’ I’ve got a lovely ’addick
for you.” She worked all day long and she sang at
her work and she was gay and happy and smiling. Her
husband was much older than she. He had been a
butler in very good families, and wore side-whiskers
and a perfect manner; he was verger at a neighbouring
church, highly respected, and he waited at table
and cleaned the boots and helped with the washing-up.
Mrs. Hudson’s only relaxation was to come up
after she had served the dinners (I had mine at half-past
six and the schoolmaster at seven) and have a
little chat with her gentlemen. I wish to goodness I
had had the sense (like Amy Driffield with her celebrated
husband) to take notes of her conversation, for
Mrs. Hudson was a mistress of Cockney humour.
She had a gift of repartee that never failed her, she
had a racy style and an apt and varied vocabulary,
she was never at a loss for the comic metaphor or
the vivid phrase. She was a pattern of propriety and
she would never have women in her house, you never
knew what they were up to (“It’s men, men, men all
the time with them, and afternoon tea and thin bread
and butter, and openin’ the door and ringin’ for ’ot
water and I don’t know what all”); but in conversation
she did not hesitate to use what was called in
those days the blue bag. One could have said of her
what she said of Marie Lloyd: “What I like about ’er
is that she gives you a good laugh. She goes pretty
near the knuckle sometimes, but she never jumps
over the fence.” Mrs. Hudson enjoyed her own
humour and I think she talked more willingly to her
lodgers because her husband was a serious man (“It’s
as it should be,” she said, “ ’im bein’ a verger and
attendin’ weddings and funerals and what all”) and
wasn’t much of a one for a joke. “Wot I says to
’Udson is, laugh while you’ve got the chance, you
won’t laugh much when you’re dead and buried.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Hudson’s humour was cumulative and the
story of her feud with Miss Butcher who let lodgings
at number fourteen was a great comic saga that
went on year in and year out.</p>

<p class="pindent">“She’s a disagreeable old cat, but I give you my
word I’d miss ’er if the Lord took ’er one fine day.
Though what ’e’d do with ’er when ’e got ’er I
can’t think. Many’s the good laugh she’s give me in
’er time.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Hudson had very bad teeth and the question
whether she should have them taken out and have
false ones was discussed by her for two or three years
with an unimaginable variety of comic invention.</p>

<p class="pindent">“But as I said to ’Udson on’y last night, when he
said, ‘Oh, come on, ’ave ’em out and ’ave done with
it’, I shouldn’t ’ave anythin’ to talk about.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I had not seen Mrs. Hudson for two or three years.
My last visit had been in answer to a little letter in
which she asked me to come and drink a nice strong
cup of tea with her and announced: “Hudson died
three months ago next Saturday, aged seventy-nine,
and George and Hester send their respectful compliments.”
George was the issue of her marriage with
Hudson. He was now a man approaching middle age
who worked at Woolwich Arsenal, and his mother
had been repeating for twenty years that George
would be bringing a wife home one of these days.
Hester was the maid-of-all-work she had engaged
toward the end of my stay with her, and Mrs. Hudson
still spoke of her as “that dratted girl of mine.”
Though Mrs. Hudson must have been well over
thirty when I first took her rooms, and that was five
and thirty years ago, I had no feeling as I walked
leisurely through the Green Park that I should not
find her alive. She was as definitely part of the recollections
of my youth as the pelicans that stood at the
edge of the ornamental water.</p>

<p class="pindent">I walked down the area steps and the door was
opened to me by Hester, a woman getting on for
fifty now and stoutish, but still bearing on her shyly
grinning face the irresponsibility of the dratted girl.
Mrs. Hudson was darning George’s socks when I
was shown into the front room of the basement and
she took off her spectacles to look at me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, if that isn’t Mr. Ashenden! Who ever
thought of seeing you? Is the water boiling, ’Ester?
You will ’ave a nice cup of tea, won’t you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Hudson was a little heavier than when I first
knew her and her movements were more deliberate,
but there was scarcely a white hair on her head, and
her eyes, as black and shining as buttons, sparkled
with fun. I sat down in a shabby little armchair covered
with maroon leather.</p>

<p class="pindent">“How are you getting on, Mrs. Hudson?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I’ve got nothin’ much to complain of except
that I’m not so young as I used to was,” she answered.
“I can’t do so much as I could when you was
’ere. I don’t give my gentlemen dinner now, only
breakfast.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Are all your rooms let?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, I’m thankful to say.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Owing to the rise of prices Mrs. Hudson was able
to get more for her rooms than in my day, and I
think in her modest way she was quite well off. But
of course people wanted a lot nowadays.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You wouldn’t believe it, first I ’ad to put in a
bathroom, and then I ’ad to put in the electric light,
and then nothin’ would satisfy them but I must ’ave
a telephone. What they’ll want next I can’t think.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Mr. George says it’s pretty near time Mrs.
’Udson thought of retiring,” said Hester, who was
laying the tea.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You mind your own business, my girl,” said Mrs.
Hudson tartly. “When I retire it’ll be to the cemetery.
Fancy me livin’ all alone with George and
’Ester without nobody to talk to.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Mr. George says she ought to take a little ’ouse
in the country an’ take care of ’erself,” said Hester,
unperturbed by the reproof.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t talk to me about the country. The doctor
said I was to go there for six weeks last summer. It
nearly killed me, I give you my word. The noise of
it. All them birds singin’ all the time, and the cocks
crowin’ and the cows mooin’. I couldn’t stick it. When
you’ve lived all the years I ’ave in peace and quietness
you can’t get used to all that racket goin’ on
all the time.”</p>

<p class="pindent">A few doors away was the Vauxhall Bridge Road
and down it trams were clanging, ringing their bells
as they went, motor buses were lumbering along,
taxis were tooting their horns. If Mrs. Hudson heard
it, it was London she heard, and it soothed her as
a mother’s crooning soothes a restless child.</p>

<p class="pindent">I looked round the cosy, shabby, homely little
parlour in which Mrs. Hudson had lived so long. I
wondered if there was anything I could do for her.
I noticed that she had a gramophone. It was the only
thing I could think of.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Is there anything you want, Mrs. Hudson?” I
asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">She fixed her beady eyes on me reflectively.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t know as there is, now you come to speak
of it, except me ’ealth and strength for another
twenty years so as I can go on workin’.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I do not think I am a sentimentalist, but her reply,
unexpected but so characteristic, made a sudden lump
come to my throat.</p>

<p class="pindent">When it was time for me to go I asked if I could
see the rooms I had lived in for five years.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Run upstairs, ’Ester, and see if Mr. Graham’s
in. If he ain’t, I’m sure ’e wouldn’t mind you ’avin’
a look at them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Hester scurried up, and in a moment, slightly
breathless, came down again to say that Mr. Graham
was out. Mrs. Hudson came with me. The bed was
the same narrow iron bed that I had slept in and
dreamed in and there was the same chest of drawers
and the same washing stand. But the sitting room
had the grim heartiness of the athlete; on the walls
were photographs of cricket elevens and rowing men
in shorts; golf clubs stood in the corner and pipes
and tobacco jars, ornamented with the arms of a
college, were littered on the chimney-piece. In my
day we believed in art for art’s sake and this I exemplified
by draping the chimney-piece with a Moorish
rug, putting up curtains of art serge and a bilious
green, and hanging on the walls autotypes of pictures
by Perugino, Van Dyck and Hobbema.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Very artistic you was, wasn’t you?” Mrs. Hudson
remarked, not without irony.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Very,” I murmured.</p>

<p class="pindent">I could not help feeling a pang as I thought of all
the years that had passed since I inhabited that room,
and of all that had happened to me. It was at that
same table that I had eaten my hearty breakfast and
my frugal dinner, read my medical books and written
my first novel. It was in that same armchair that I
had read for the first time Wordsworth and Stendhal,
the Elizabethan dramatists and the Russian novelists,
Gibbon, Boswell, Voltaire, and Rousseau. I wondered
who had used them since. Medical students,
articled clerks, young fellows making their way in
the city, and elderly men retired from the colonies
or thrown unexpectedly upon the world by the break
up of an old home. The room made me, as Mrs.
Hudson would have put it, go queer all over. All the
hopes that had been cherished there, the bright
visions of the future, the flaming passion of youth;
the regrets, the disillusion, the weariness, the resignation;
so much had been felt in that room, by so
many, the whole gamut of human emotion, that it
seemed strangely to have acquired a troubling and
enigmatic personality of its own. I have no notion
why, but it made me think of a woman at a crossroad
with a finger on her lips, looking back and with
her other hand beckoning. What I obscurely (and
rather shamefacedly) felt, communicated itself to
Mrs. Hudson, for she gave a laugh and with a characteristic
gesture rubbed her prominent nose.</p>

<p class="pindent">“My word, people are funny,” she said. “When I
think of all the gentlemen I’ve ’ad here, I give you
my word you wouldn’t believe it if I told you some
of the things I know about them. One of them’s
funnier than the other. Sometimes I lie abed thinkin’
of them, and <span class="it">laugh</span>. Well, it would be a bad world if
you didn’t get a good laugh now and then, but, lor’,
lodgers really are the limit.”</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XIII</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">I lived</span> with Mrs. Hudson for nearly two years
before I met the Driffields again. My life was very
regular. I spent all day at the hospital and about six
walked back to Vincent Square. I bought the <span class="it">Star</span>
at Lambeth Bridge and read it till my dinner was
served. Then I read seriously for an hour or two,
works to improve my mind, for I was a strenuous,
earnest, and industrious youth, and after that wrote
novels and plays till bedtime. I do not know for what
reason it was that one day toward the end of June,
happening to leave the hospital early, I thought I
would walk down the Vauxhall Bridge Road. I liked
it for its noisy bustle. It had a sordid vivacity that
was pleasantly exciting and you felt that at any
moment an adventure might there befall you. I
strolled along in a daydream and was surprised suddenly
to hear my name. I stopped and looked, and
there to my astonishment stood Mrs. Driffield. She
was smiling at me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you know me?” she cried.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes. Mrs. Driffield.”</p>

<p class="pindent">And though I was grown up I was conscious that
I was blushing as furiously as when I was sixteen. I
was embarrassed. With my lamentably Victorian
notions of honesty I had been much shocked by the
Driffields’ behaviour in running away from Blackstable
without paying their bills. It seemed to me
very shabby. I felt deeply the shame I thought they
must feel and I was astounded that Mrs. Driffield
should speak to someone who knew of the discreditable
incident. If I had seen her coming I should
have looked away, my delicacy presuming that she
would wish to avoid the mortification of being seen
by me; but she held out her hand and shook mine
with obvious pleasure.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I am glad to see a Blackstable face,” she said.
“You know we left there in a hurry.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She laughed and I laughed too; but her laugh was
mirthful and childlike, while mine, I felt, was
strained.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hear there <span class="it">was</span> a to-do when they found out we’d
skipped. I thought Ted would never stop laughing
when he heard about it. What did your uncle say?”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was quick to get the right tone. I wasn’t going
to let her think that I couldn’t see a joke as well as
anyone.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, you know what he is. He’s very old-fashioned.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, that’s what’s wrong with Blackstable. They
want waking up.” She gave me a friendly look.
“You’ve grown a lot since I saw you last. Why,
you’re growing a moustache.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” I said, giving it as much of a twirl as its
size allowed me. “I’ve had that for ages.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How time does fly, doesn’t it? You were just a
boy four years ago and now you’re a man.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I ought to be,” I replied somewhat haughtily.
“I’m nearly twenty-one.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was looking at Mrs. Driffield. She wore a very
small hat with feathers in it, and a pale gray dress
with large leg-of-mutton sleeves and a long train. I
thought she looked very smart. I had always thought
that she had a nice face, but I noticed now, for the
first time, that she was pretty. Her eyes were bluer
than I remembered and her skin was like ivory.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You know we live just round the corner,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“So do I.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“We live in Limpus Road. We’ve been there almost
ever since we left Blackstable.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I’ve been in Vincent Square for nearly two
years.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I knew you were in London. George Kemp told
me so, and I often wondered where you were. Why
don’t you walk back with me now? Ted will be so
pleased to see you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t mind,” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">As we walked along she told me that Driffield
was now literary editor of a weekly paper; his last
book had done much better than any of his others
and he was expecting to get quite a bit as an advance
on royalties for the next one. She seemed to know
most of the Blackstable news, and I remembered how
it had been suspected that Lord George had helped
the Driffields in their flight. I guessed that he wrote
to them now and then. I noticed as we walked along
that sometimes the men who passed us stared at Mrs.
Driffield. It occurred to me presently that they must
think her pretty too. I began to walk with a certain
swagger.</p>

<p class="pindent">Limpus Road was a long wide straight street that
ran parallel with the Vauxhall Bridge Road. The
houses were all alike, of stucco, dingily painted, solid,
and with substantial porticos. I suppose they had
been built to be inhabited by men of standing in the
city of London, but the street had gone down in
the world or had never attracted the right sort of
tenant; and its decayed respectability had an air
at once furtive and shabbily dissipated, that made
you think of persons who had seen better days and
now, genteelly fuddled, talked of the social distinction
of their youth. The Driffields lived in a house
painted a dull red, and Mrs. Driffield letting me into
a narrow dark hall, opened a door and said:</p>

<p class="pindent">“Go in. I’ll tell Ted you’re here.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She walked down the hall and I entered the sitting
room. The Driffields had the basement and the
ground floor of the house, which they rented from
the lady who lived in the upper part. The room into
which I went looked as if it had been furnished with
the scourings of auction sales. There were heavy
velvet curtains with great fringes, all loops and festoons,
and a gilt suite, upholstered in yellow damask,
heavily buttoned; and there was a great pouffe in
the middle of the room. There were gilt cabinets in
which were masses of little articles, pieces of china,
ivory figures, wood carvings, bits of Indian brass;
and on the walls hung large oil paintings of highland
glens and stags and gillies. In a moment Mrs. Driffield
brought her husband and he greeted me warmly.
He wore a shabby alpaca coat and gray trousers; he
had shaved his beard and wore now a moustache and
a small imperial. I noticed for the first time how
short he was; but he looked more distinguished than
he used to. There was something a trifle foreign in
his appearance and I thought this was much more
what I should expect an author to look like.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, what do you think of our new abode?” he
asked. “It looks rich, doesn’t it? I think it inspires
confidence.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He looked round him with satisfaction.</p>

<p class="pindent">“And Ted’s got his den at the back where he can
write, and we’ve got a dining room in the basement,”
said Mrs. Driffield. “Miss Cowley was companion
for many years to a lady of title and when she died
she left her all her furniture. You can see everything’s
good, can’t you? You can see it came out of a gentleman’s
house.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Rosie fell in love with the place the moment we
saw it,” said Driffield.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You did too, Ted.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“We’ve lived in sordid circumstances so long; it’s
a change to be surrounded by luxury. Madame de
Pompadour and all that sort of thing.”</p>

<p class="pindent">When I left them it was with a very cordial invitation
to come again. It appeared that they were at
home every Saturday afternoon and all sorts of
people whom I would like to meet were in the habit
of dropping in.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XIV</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">I went</span>. I enjoyed myself. I went again. When the
autumn came and I returned to London for the winter
session at St. Luke’s I got into the habit of going
every Saturday. It was my introduction into the world
of art and letters; I kept it a profound secret that
in the privacy of my lodgings I was busily writing;
I was excited to meet people who were writing also
and I listened entranced to their conversation. All
sorts of persons came to these parties: at that time
week-ends were rare, golf was still a subject for
ridicule, and few had much to do on Saturday afternoons.
I do not think anyone came who was of any
great importance; at all events, of all the painters,
writers, and musicians I met at the Driffields’ I cannot
remember one whose reputation has endured; but
the effect was cultured and animated. You found
young actors who were looking for parts and middle-aged
singers who deplored the fact that the English
were not a musical race, composers who played their
compositions on the Driffields’ cottage piano and
complained in a whispered aside that they sounded
nothing except on a concert grand, poets who on
pressure consented to read a little thing that they
had just written, and painters who were looking for
commissions. Now and then a person of title added
a certain glamour; seldom, however, for in those
days the aristocracy had not yet become bohemian
and if a person of quality cultivated the society of
artists it was generally because a notorious divorce
or a little difficulty over cards had made life in his
own station (or hers) a bit awkward. We have
changed all that. One of the greatest benefits that
compulsory education has conferred upon the world
is the wide diffusion among the nobility and gentry
of the practice of writing. Horace Walpole once
wrote a <span class="it">Catalogue of Royal and Noble Authors</span>;
such a work now would have the dimensions of an
encyclopædia. A title, even a courtesy one, can make
a well known author of almost anyone and it may
be safely asserted that there is no better passport
to the world of letters than rank.</p>

<p class="pindent">I have indeed sometimes thought that now that
the House of Lords must inevitably in a short while
be abolished, it would be a very good plan if the
profession of literature were by law confined to its
members and their wives and children. It would be
a graceful compensation that the British people might
offer the peers in return for the surrender of their
hereditary privileges. It would be a means of support
for those (too many) whom devotion to the
public cause in keeping chorus girls and race horses
and playing <span class="it">chemin de fer</span> has impoverished, and a
pleasant occupation for the rest who by the process
of natural selection have in the course of time become
unfit to do anything but govern the British Empire.
But this is an age of specialization and if my plan
is adopted it is obvious that it cannot but be to the
greater glory of English literature that its various
provinces should be apportioned among the various
ranks of the nobility. I would suggest, therefore, that
the humbler branches of literature should be practised
by the lower orders of the peerage and that the
barons and viscounts should devote themselves exclusively
to journalism and the drama. Fiction might
be the privileged demesne of the earls. They have
already shown their aptitude for this difficult art and
their numbers are so great that they would very
competently supply the demand. To the marquises
might safely be left the production of that part of
literature which is known (I have never quite seen
why) as <span class="it">belles lettres</span>. It is perhaps not very profitable
from a pecuniary standpoint, but it has a distinction
that very well suits the holders of this romantic
title.</p>

<p class="pindent">The crown of literature is poetry. It is its end
and aim. It is the sublimest activity of the human
mind. It is the achievement of beauty. The writer of
prose can only step aside when the poet passes; he
makes the best of us look like a piece of cheese. It
is evident then that the writing of poetry should be
left to the dukes, and I should like to see their rights
protected by the most severe pains and penalties, for
it is intolerable that the noblest of arts should be
practised by any but the noblest of men. And since
here, too, specialization must prevail, I foresee that
the dukes (like the successors of Alexander) will
divide the realm of poetry between them, each confining
himself to that aspect with which hereditary
influence and natural bent have rendered him
competent to deal: thus I see the dukes of Manchester
writing poems of a didactic and moral character,
the dukes of Westminster composing stirring
odes on Duty and the Responsibilities of Empire;
whereas I imagine that the dukes of Devonshire
would be more likely to write love lyrics and elegies
in the Propertian manner, while it is almost inevitable
that the dukes of Marlborough should pipe in an
idyllic strain on such subjects as domestic bliss, conscription,
and content with modest station.</p>

<p class="pindent">But if you say that this is somewhat formidable
and remind me that the muse does not only stalk
with majestic tread, but on occasion trips on a light
fantastic toe; if, recalling the wise person who said
that he did not care who made a nation’s laws so
long as he wrote its songs, you ask me (thinking
rightly that it would ill become the dukes to do so)
who shall twang those measures on the lyre that the
diverse and inconstant soul of man occasionally
hankers after—I answer (obviously enough, I should
have thought) the duchesses. I recognize that the day
is past when the amorous peasants of the Romagna
sang to their sweethearts the verses of Torquato
Tasso and Mrs. Humphry Ward crooned over young
Arnold’s cradle the choruses of Œdipus in Colonus.
The age demands something more up-to-date. I suggest,
therefore, that the more domestic duchesses
should write our hymns and our nursery rhymes;
while the skittish ones, those who incline to mingle
vine leaves with the strawberry, should write the
lyrics for musical comedies, humorous verse for the
comic papers, and mottoes for Christmas cards and
crackers. Thus would they retain in the hearts of
the British public that place which they have held
hitherto only on account of their exalted station.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was at these parties on Saturday afternoon that
I discovered very much to my surprise that Edward
Driffield was a distinguished person. He had written
something like twenty books, and though he had
never made more than a pittance out of them his
reputation was considerable. The best judges admired
them and the friends who came to his house
were agreed that one of these days he would be recognized.
They rated the public because it would not
see that here was a great writer, and since the easiest
way to exalt one man is to kick another in the pants,
they reviled freely all the novelists whose contemporary
fame obscured his. If, indeed, I had known
as much of literary circles as I learned later I should
have guessed by the not infrequent visits of Mrs.
Barton Trafford that the time was approaching when
Edward Driffield, like a runner in a long-distance
race breaking away suddenly from the little knot of
plodding athletes, must forge ahead. I admit that
when first I was introduced to this lady her name
meant nothing to me. Driffield presented me as a
young neighbour of his in the country and told her
that I was a medical student. She gave me a mellifluous
smile, murmured in a soft voice something about
Tom Sawyer, and, accepting the bread and butter I
offered her, went on talking with her host. But I
noticed that her arrival had made an impression and
the conversation, which had been noisy and hilarious,
was hushed. When in an undertone I asked who she
was, I found that my ignorance was amazing; I was
told that she had “made” So and So and So and So.
After half an hour she rose, shook hands very graciously
with such of the people as she was acquainted
with, and with a sort of lithe sweetness sidled out
of the room. Driffield accompanied her to the door
and put her in a hansom.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Barton Trafford was then a woman of about
fifty; she was small and slight, but with rather large
features, which made her head look a little too big
for her body; she had crisp white hair which she
wore like the Venus of Milo, and she was supposed
in her youth to have been very comely. She dressed
discreetly in black silk, and wore round her neck
jangling chains of beads and shells. She was said
to have been unhappily married in early life, but now
for many years had been congenially united to
Barton Trafford, a clerk in the Home Office and a
well known authority on prehistoric man. She gave
you the curious impression of having no bones in her
body and you felt that if you pinched her shin (which
of course my respect for her sex as well as something
of quiet dignity in her appearance would have never
allowed me to do) your fingers would meet. When
you took her hand it was like taking a fillet of sole.
Her face, notwithstanding its large features, had
something fluid about it. When she sat it was as
though she had no backbone and were stuffed, like
an expensive cushion, with swansdown.</p>

<p class="pindent">Everything was soft about her, her voice, her smile,
her laugh; her eyes, which were small and pale, had
the softness of flowers; her manner was as soft as
the summer rain. It was this extraordinary, and
charming, characteristic that made her the wonderful
friend she was. It was this that had gained her
the celebrity that she now enjoyed. The whole world
was aware of her friendship with the great novelist
whose death a few years back had come as such a
shock to the English-speaking peoples. Everyone had
read the innumerable letters which he had written to
her and which she was induced to publish shortly
after his demise. Every page revealed his admiration
for her beauty and his respect for her judgment;
he could never say often enough how much he owed
to her encouragement, her ready sympathy, her tact,
her taste; and if certain of his expressions of passion
were such as some persons might think would
not be read by Mr. Barton Trafford with unmixed
feelings, that only added to the human interest of the
work. But Mr. Barton Trafford was above the prejudices
of vulgar men (his misfortune, if such it was,
was one that the greatest personages in history have
endured with philosophy) and, abandoning his studies
of aurignacian flints and neolithic ax heads he consented
to write a Life of the deceased novelist in
which he showed quite definitely how great a part of
the writer’s genius was due to his wife’s influence.</p>

<p class="pindent">But Mrs. Barton Trafford’s interest in literature,
her passion for art, were not dead because the friend
for whom she had done so much had become part,
with her far from negligible assistance, of posterity.
She was a great reader. Little that was noteworthy
escaped her attention and she was quick to establish
personal relations with any young writer who showed
promise. Her fame, especially since the Life, was now
such that she was sure that no one would hesitate to
accept the sympathy she was prepared to offer. It was
inevitable that Mrs. Barton Trafford’s genius for
friendship should in due course find an outlet. When
she read something that struck her, Mr. Barton Trafford,
himself no mean critic, wrote a warm letter
of appreciation to the author and asked him to luncheon.
After luncheon, having to get back to the Home
Office, he left him to have a chat with Mrs. Barton
Trafford. Many were called. They all had <span class="it">something</span>,
but that was not enough. Mrs. Barton Trafford had
a <span class="it">flair</span>, and she trusted her <span class="it">flair</span>; her <span class="it">flair</span> bade her
wait.</p>

<p class="pindent">She was so cautious indeed that with Jasper Gibbons
she almost missed the bus. The records of the
past tell us of writers who grew famous in a night,
but in our more prudent day this is unheard of. The
critics want to see which way the cat will jump,
and the public has been sold a pup too often to
take unnecessary chances. But in the case of Jasper
Gibbons it is almost the exact truth that he did
thus jump into celebrity. Now that he is so completely
forgotten and the critics who praised him
would willingly eat their words if they were not
carefully guarded in the files of innumerable newspaper
offices, the sensation he made with his first
volume of poems is almost unbelievable. The most
important papers gave to reviews of them as much
space as they would have to the report of a prize
fight; the most influential critics fell over one another
in their eagerness to welcome him. They likened him
to Milton (for the sonority of his blank verse), to
Keats (for the opulence of his sensuous imagery),
and to Shelley (for his airy fantasy); and, using
him as a stick to beat idols of whom they were weary,
they gave in his name many a resounding whack on
the emaciated buttocks of Lord Tennyson and a few
good husky smacks on the bald pate of Robert Browning.
The public fell like the walls of Jericho. Edition
after edition was sold, and you saw Jasper Gibbons’s
handsome volume in the boudoirs of countesses in
Mayfair, in vicarage drawing rooms from Land’s
End to John o’ Groats, and in the parlours of many
an honest but cultured merchant in Glasgow, Aberdeen,
and Belfast. When it became known that Queen
Victoria had accepted a specially bound copy of the
book from the hands of the loyal publisher, and had
given him (not the poet, the publisher) a copy of
<span class="it">Leaves from a Journal in the Highlands</span> in exchange,
the national enthusiasm knew no bounds.</p>

<p class="pindent">And all this happened as it were in the twinkling
of an eye. Seven cities in Greece disputed the honour
of having given birth to Homer, and though Jasper
Gibbons’s birthplace (Walsall) was well known,
twice seven critics claimed the honour of having discovered
him; eminent judges of literature who for
twenty years had written eulogies of one another’s
works in the weekly papers quarrelled so bitterly
over this matter that one cut the other dead in the
Athenæum. Nor was the great world remiss in giving
him its recognition. Jasper Gibbons was asked to
luncheon and invited to tea by dowager duchesses, the
wives of cabinet ministers, and the widows of bishops.
It is said that Harrison Ainsworth was the first English
man of letters to move in English society on terms
of equality (and I have sometimes wondered that
an enterprising publisher on this account has not
thought of bringing out a complete edition of his
works); but I believe that Jasper Gibbons was the
first poet to have his name engraved at the bottom
of an At Home card as a draw as enticing as an
opera singer or a ventriloquist.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was out of the question then for Mrs. Barton
Trafford to get in on the ground floor. She could
only buy in the open market. I do not know what
prodigious strategy she employed, what miracles of
tact, what tenderness, what exquisite sympathy, what
demure blandishments; I can only surmise and admire;
she nobbled Jasper Gibbons. In a little while
he was eating out of her soft hand. She was admirable.
She had him to lunch to meet the right
people; she gave At Homes where he recited his
poems before the most distinguished persons in England;
she introduced him to eminent actors who gave
him commissions to write plays; she saw that his
poems should only appear in the proper places; she
dealt with the publishers and made contracts for
him that would have staggered even a cabinet minister;
she took care that he should accept only the
invitations of which she approved; she even went
so far as to separate him from the wife with whom
he had lived happily for ten years, since she felt that
a poet to be true to himself and his art must not be
encumbered with domestic ties. When the crash came
Mrs. Barton Trafford, had she chosen, might have
said that she had done everything for him that it was
humanly possible to do.</p>

<p class="pindent">For there was a crash. Jasper Gibbons brought out
another volume of poetry; it was neither better nor
worse than the first; it was very much like the first;
it was treated with respect, but the critics made reservations;
some of them even carped. The book was a
disappointment. Its sale also. And unfortunately
Jasper Gibbons was inclined to tipple. He had never
been accustomed to having money to spend, he was
quite unused to the lavish entertainments that were
offered him, perhaps he missed his homely, common
little wife; once or twice he came to dinner at Mrs.
Barton Trafford’s in a condition that anyone less
worldly, less simple-minded than she, would have described
as blind to the world. She told her guests
gently that the bard was not quite himself that evening.
His third book was a failure. The critics tore
him limb from limb, they knocked him down and
stamped on him, and, to quote one of Edward Driffield’s
favourite songs, then they lugged him round
the room and then they jumped upon his face: they
were quite naturally annoyed that they had mistaken
a fluent versifier for a deathless poet and were determined
that he should suffer for their error. Then
Jasper Gibbons was arrested for being drunk and
disorderly in Piccadilly and Mr. Barton Trafford
had to go to Vine Street at midnight to bail him out.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Barton Trafford at this juncture was perfect.
She did not repine. No harsh word escaped her lips.
She might have been excused if she had felt a certain
bitterness because this man for whom she had done
so much had let her down. She remained tender,
gentle, and sympathetic. She was the woman who
understood. She dropped him, but not like a hot
brick, or a hot potato. She dropped him with infinite
gentleness, as softly as the tear that she doubtless
shed when she made up her mind to do something
so repugnant to her nature; she dropped him with
so much tact, with such sensibility, that Jasper Gibbons
perhaps hardly knew he was dropped. But there
was no doubt about it. She would say nothing against
him, indeed she would not discuss him at all, and
when mention was made of him she merely smiled,
a little sadly, and sighed. But her smile was the <span class="it">coup
de grâce</span>, and her sigh buried him deep.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Barton Trafford had a passion for literature
too sincere to allow a setback of this character long
to discourage her; and however great her disappointment
she was a woman of too disinterested a nature
to let the gifts of tact, sympathy, and understanding
with which she was blessed by nature lie fallow. She
continued to move in literary circles, going to tea
parties here and there, to soirées, and to At Homes,
charming always and gentle, listening intelligently,
but watchful, critical, and determined (if I may put
it crudely) next time to back a winner. It was then
that she met Edward Driffield and formed a favourable
opinion of his gifts. It is true that he was not
young, but then he was unlikely like Jasper Gibbons
to go to pieces. She offered him her friendship. He
could not fail to be moved when, in that gentle way
of hers, she told him that it was a scandal that his
exquisite work remained known only in a narrow
circle. He was pleased and flattered. It is always
pleasant to be assured that you are a genius. She
told him that Barton Trafford was reflecting on the
possibility of writing an important article on him
for the <span class="it">Quarterly Review</span>. She asked him to luncheon
to meet people who might be useful to him. She
wanted him to know his intellectual equals. Sometimes
she took him for a walk on the Chelsea Embankment
and they talked of poets dead and gone
and love and friendship, and had tea in an A.B.C.
shop. When Mrs. Barton Trafford came to Limpus
Street on Saturday afternoon she had the air of the
queen bee preparing herself for the nuptial flight.</p>

<p class="pindent">Her manner with Mrs. Driffield was perfect. It
was affable, but not condescending. She always
thanked her very prettily for having allowed her to
come and see her and complimented her on her appearance.
If she praised Edward Driffield to her,
telling her with a little envy in her tone what a privilege
it was to enjoy the companionship of such a great
man, it was certainly from pure kindness, and not
because she knew that there is nothing that exasperates
the wife of a literary man more than to have
another woman tell her flattering things about him.
She talked to Mrs. Driffield of the simple things her
simple nature might be supposed to be interested in,
of cooking and servants and Edward’s health and
how careful she must be with him. Mrs. Barton
Trafford treated her exactly as you would expect a
woman of very good Scotch family, which she was,
to treat an ex-barmaid with whom a distinguished
man of letters had made an unfortunate marriage.
She was cordial, playful, and gently determined to
put her at her ease.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was strange that Rosie could not bear her; indeed,
Mrs. Barton Trafford was the only person
that I ever knew her dislike. In those days even
barmaids did not habitually use the “bitches” and
“bloodys” that are part and parcel of the current
vocabulary of the best-brought-up young ladies, and
I never heard Rosie use a word that would have
shocked my Aunt Sophie. When anyone told a story
that was a little near the knuckle she would blush to
the roots of her hair. But she referred to Mrs. Barton
Trafford as “that damned old cat.” It needed
the most urgent persuasions of her more intimate
friends to induce her to be civil to her.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t be a fool, Rosie,” they said. They all
called her Rosie and presently I, though very shyly,
got in the habit of doing so too. “If she wants to she
can make him. He must play up to her. She can work
the trick if anyone can.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Though most of the Driffields’ visitors were occasional,
appearing every other Saturday, say, or
every third, there was a little band that, like myself,
came almost every week. We were the stand-bys; we
arrived early and stayed late. Of these the most faithful
were Quentin Forde, Harry Retford, and Lionel
Hillier.</p>

<p class="pindent">Quentin Forde was a stocky little man with a fine
head of the type that was afterward for a time much
admired in the moving pictures, a straight nose and
handsome eyes, neatly cropped gray hair, and a black
moustache; if he had been four or five inches taller
he would have been the perfect type of the villain
of melodrama. He was known to be very “well connected,”
and he was affluent; his only occupation was
to cultivate the arts. He went to all the first nights
and all the private views. He had the amateur’s
severity, and cherished for the productions of his
contemporaries a polite but sweeping contempt. I
discovered that he did not come to the Driffields’
because Edward was a genius, but because Rosie was
beautiful.</p>

<p class="pindent">Now that I look back I cannot get over my surprise
that I should have had to be told what was
surely so obvious. When I first knew her it never
occurred to me to ask myself whether she was pretty
or plain, and when, seeing her again after five years,
I noticed for the first time that she was very pretty,
I was interested but did not trouble to think much
about it. I took it as part of the natural order of
things, just as I took the sun setting over the North
Sea or the towers of Tercanbury Cathedral. I was
quite startled when I heard people speak of Rosie’s
beauty, and when they complimented Edward on
her looks and his eyes rested on her for a moment,
mine followed his. Lionel Hillier was a painter and
he asked her to sit for him. When he talked of the
picture he wanted to paint and told me what he saw
in her, I listened to him stupidly. I was puzzled and
confused. Harry Retford knew one of the fashionable
photographers of the period and, arranging
special terms, he took Rosie to be photographed. A
Saturday or two later the proofs were there and we
all looked at them. I had never seen Rosie in evening
dress. She was wearing a dress of white satin,
with a long train and puffy sleeves, and it was cut
low; her hair was more elaborately done than usual.
She looked very different from the strapping young
woman I had first met in Joy Lane in a boater and
a starched shirt. But Lionel Hillier tossed the photographs
aside impatiently.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Rotten,” he said. “What can a photograph give
of Rosie? The thing about her is her colour.” He
turned to her. “Rosie, don’t you know that your
colour is <span class="it">the</span> great miracle of the age?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She looked at him without answering, but her full
red lips broke into their childlike, mischievous smile.</p>

<p class="pindent">“If I can only get a suggestion of it I’m made for
life,” he said. “All the rich stockbrokers’ wives will
come on their bended knees and beg me to paint them
like you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Presently I learned that Rosie was sitting to him,
but when, never having been in a painter’s studio and
looking upon it as the gateway of romance, I asked
if I might not come one day and see how the picture
was getting on, Hillier said that he did not want
anyone to see it yet. He was a man of five and thirty
and of a flamboyant appearance. He looked like a
portrait of Van Dyck in which the distinction had
been replaced by good humour. He was slightly above
the middle height, slim; and he had a fine mane of
black hair and flowing moustaches and a pointed
beard. He favoured broad-brimmed sombreros and
Spanish capes. He had lived a long time in Paris and
talked admiringly of painters, Monet, Sisley, Renoir,
of whom we had never heard, and with contempt of
Sir Frederick Leighton and Mr. Alma-Tadema and
Mr. G. F. Watts, whom in our heart of hearts we
very much admired. I have often wondered what
became of him. He spent a few years in London trying
to make his way, failed, I suppose, and then
drifted to Florence. I was told that he had a drawing
school there, but when, years later, chancing to be
in that city, I asked about him, I could find no one
who had ever heard of him. I think he must have
had some talent, for I have even now a very vivid
recollection of the portrait he painted of Rosie
Driffield. I wonder what has happened to it. Has it
been destroyed or is it hidden away, its face to the
wall, in the attic of a junk shop in Chelsea? I should
like to think that it has at least found a place on the
walls of some provincial gallery.</p>

<p class="pindent">When I was at last allowed to come and see it, I
put my foot in it fine and proper. Hillier’s studio was
in the Fulham Road, one of a group at the back of a
row of shops, and you went in through a dark and
smelly passage. It was a Sunday afternoon in March,
a fine blue day, and I walked from Vincent Square
through deserted streets. Hillier lived in his studio;
there was a large divan on which he slept, and a
tiny little room at the back where he cooked his
breakfast, washed his brushes, and, I suppose, himself.</p>

<p class="pindent">When I arrived Rosie still wore the dress in which
she had been sitting and they were having a cup of
tea. Hillier opened the door for me, and still holding
my hand led me up to the large canvas.</p>

<p class="pindent">“There she is,” he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">He had painted Rosie full length, just a little less
than life-size, in an evening dress of white silk. It
was not at all like the academy portraits I was accustomed
to. I did not know what to say, so I said the
first thing that came into my head.</p>

<p class="pindent">“When will it be finished?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“It is finished,” he answered.</p>

<p class="pindent">I blushed furiously. I felt a perfect fool. I had not
then acquired the technique that I flatter myself now
enables me to deal competently with the works of
modern artists. If this were the place I could write
a very neat little guide to enable the amateur of pictures
to deal to the satisfaction of their painters with
the most diverse manifestations of the creative instinct.
There is the intense “By God” that acknowledges
the power of the ruthless realist, the “It’s so
awfully sincere” that covers your embarrassment
when you are shown the coloured photograph of an
alderman’s widow, the low whistle that exhibits your
admiration for the post-impressionist, the “Terribly
amusing” that expresses what you feel about the
cubist, the “Oh!” of one who is overcome, the “Ah!”
of him whose breath is taken away.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s awfully like,” was all that then I could lamely
say.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s not chocolate-boxy enough for you,” said
Hillier.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think it’s awfully good,” I answered quickly,
defending myself. “Are you going to send it to the
Academy?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good God, no! I might send it to the Grosvenor.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I looked from the painting to Rosie and from
Rosie to the painting.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Get into the pose, Rosie,” said Hillier, “and let
him see you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She got up on to the model stand. I stared at her
and I stared at the picture. I had such a funny little
feeling in my heart. It was as though someone softly
plunged a sharp knife into it, but it was not an unpleasant
sensation at all, painful but strangely agreeable;
and then suddenly I felt quite weak at the knees.
But now I do not know if I remember Rosie in the
flesh or in the picture. For when I think of her it is
not in the shirt and boater that I first saw her in,
nor in any of the other dresses I saw her in then or
later, but in the white silk that Hillier painted, with
a black velvet bow in her hair, and in the pose he had
made her take.</p>

<p class="pindent">I never exactly knew Rosie’s age, but reckoning
the years out as well as I can, I think she must have
been thirty-five. She did not look anything like it.
Her face was quite unlined and her skin as smooth
as a child’s. I do not think she had very good features.
They certainly had none of the aristocratic
distinction of the great ladies whose photographs
were then sold in all the shops; they were rather
blunt. Her short nose was a little thick, her eyes were
smallish, her mouth was large; but her eyes had the
blue of cornflowers, and they smiled with her lips,
very red and sensual, and her smile was the gayest,
the most friendly, the sweetest thing I ever saw. She
had by nature a heavy, sullen look, but when she
smiled this sullenness became on a sudden infinitely
attractive. She had no colour in her face; it was of
a very pale brown except under the eyes where it
was faintly blue. Her hair was pale gold and it was
done in the fashion of the day high on the head with
an elaborate fringe.</p>

<p class="pindent">“She’s the very devil to paint,” said Hillier, looking
at her and at his picture. “You see, she’s all gold,
her face and her hair, and yet she doesn’t give you
a golden effect, she gives you a silvery effect.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I knew what he meant. She glowed, but palely,
like the moon rather than the sun, or if it was like
the sun it was like the sun in the white mist of dawn.
Hillier had placed her in the middle of his canvas
and she stood, with her arms by her sides, the palms
of her hands toward you and her head a little thrown
back, in an attitude that gave value to the pearly
beauty of her neck and bosom. She stood like an
actress taking a call, confused by unexpected applause,
but there was something so virginal about
her, so exquisitely springlike, that the comparison
was absurd. This artless creature had never known
grease paint or footlights. She stood like a maiden
apt for love offering herself guilelessly, because she
was fulfilling the purposes of Nature, to the embraces
of a lover. She belonged to a generation that did not
fear a certain opulence of line, she was slender, but
her breasts were ample and her hips well marked.
When, later, Mrs. Barton Trafford saw the picture
she said it reminded her of a sacrificial heifer.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XV</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">Edward Driffield</span> worked at night, and Rosie,
having nothing to do, was glad to go out with one or
other of her friends. She liked luxury and Quentin
Forde was well-to-do. He would fetch her in a cab
and take her to dine at Kettner’s or the Savoy, and
she would put on her grandest clothes for him; and
Harry Retford, though he never had a bob, behaved
as if he had, and took her about in hansoms too and
gave her dinner at Romano’s or in one or other of
the little restaurants that were becoming modish in
Soho. He was an actor and a clever one, but he was
difficult to suit and so was often out of work. He
was about thirty, a man with a pleasantly ugly face
and a clipped way of speaking that made what he
said sound funny. Rosie liked his devil-may-care attitude
toward life, the swagger with which he wore
clothes made by the best tailor in London and unpaid
for, the recklessness with which he would put a fiver
he hadn’t got on a horse, and the generosity with
which he flung his money about when a lucky win
put him in funds. He was gay, charming, vain, boastful,
and unscrupulous. Rosie told me that once he
had pawned his watch to take her out to dinner and
then borrowed a couple of pounds from the actor
manager who had given them seats for the play in
order to take him out to supper with them afterward.</p>

<p class="pindent">But she was just as well pleased to go with Lionel
Hillier to his studio and eat a chop that he and she
cooked between them and spend the evening talking,
and it was only very rarely that she would dine
with me at all. I used to fetch her after I had had my
dinner in Vincent Square and she hers with Driffield,
and we would get on a bus and go to a music
hall. We went here and there, to the Pavilion or the
Tivoli, sometimes to the Metropolitan if there was
a particular turn we wanted to see; but our favourite
was the Canterbury. It was cheap and the show was
good. We ordered a couple of beers and I smoked
my pipe. Rosie looked round with delight at the
great dark smoky house, crowded to the ceiling with
the inhabitants of South London.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I like the Canterbury,” she said. “It’s so homey.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I discovered that she was a great reader. She liked
history, but only history of a certain kind, the lives
of queens and of mistresses of royal personages; and
she would tell me with a childlike wonder of the
strange things she read. She had a wide acquaintance
with the six consorts of King Henry VIII and there
was little she did not know about Mrs. Fitzherbert
and Lady Hamilton. Her appetite was prodigious
and she ranged from Lucrezia Borgia to the wives
of Philip of Spain; then there was the long list of
the royal mistresses of France. She knew them all,
and all about them, from Agnes Sorel down to
Madame du Barry.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I like to read about real things,” she said. “I
don’t much care about novels.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She liked to gossip about Blackstable and I thought
it was on account of my connection with it that she
liked to come out with me. She seemed to know all
that was going on there.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I go down every other week or so to see my
mother,” she said. “Just for the night, you know.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“To Blackstable?”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was surprised.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, not to Blackstable,” Rosie smiled. “I don’t
know that I’d care to go there just yet. To Haversham.
Mother comes over to meet me. I stay at
the hotel where I used to work.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She was never a great talker. Often when, the
night being fine, we decided to walk back from the
music hall at which we had been spending the evening,
she never opened her mouth. But her silence
was intimate and comfortable. It did not exclude you
from thoughts that engaged her apart from you; it
included you in a pervasive well-being.</p>

<p class="pindent">I was talking about her once to Lionel Hillier and
I said to him that I could not understand how she
had turned from the fresh pleasant-looking young
woman I had first known at Blackstable into the
lovely creature whose beauty now practically everyone
acknowledged. (There were people who made
reservations. “Of course she has a very good figure,”
they said, “but it’s not the sort of face I very much
admire personally.” And others said: “Oh, yes, of
course, a very pretty woman; but it’s a pity she hasn’t
a little more distinction.”)</p>

<p class="pindent">“I can explain that to you in half a jiffy,” said
Lionel Hillier. “She was only a fresh, buxom wench
when you first met her. <span class="it">I</span> made her beauty.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I forget what my answer was, but I know it was
ribald.</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right. That just shows you don’t know anything
about beauty. No one ever thought very much
of Rosie till I saw her like the sun shining silver. It
wasn’t till I painted it that anyone knew that her
hair was the most lovely thing in the world.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Did you make her neck and her breasts and her
carriage and her bones?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, damn you, that’s just what I did do.”</p>

<p class="pindent">When Hillier talked of Rosie in front of her she
listened to him with a smiling gravity. A little flush
came into her pale cheeks. I think that at first when
he spoke to her of her beauty she believed he was
just making game of her; but when she found out
that he wasn’t, when he painted her silvery gold,
it had no particular effect on her. She was a trifle
amused, pleased of course, and a little surprised, but
it did not turn her head. She thought him a little
mad. I often wondered whether there was anything
between them. I could not forget all I had heard of
Rosie at Blackstable and what I had seen in the
vicarage garden; I wondered about Quentin Forde,
too, and Harry Retford. I used to watch them with
her. She was not exactly familiar with them, comradely
rather; she used to make her appointments
with them quite openly in anybody’s hearing; and
when she looked at them it was with that mischievous,
childlike smile which I had now discovered held such
a mysterious beauty. Sometimes when we were sitting
side by side in a music hall I looked at her face; I do
not think I was in love with her, I merely enjoyed the
sensation of sitting quietly beside her and looking at
the pale gold of her hair and the pale gold of her skin.
Of course Lionel Hillier was right; the strange thing
was that this gold did give one a strange moonlight
feeling. She had the serenity of a summer evening
when the light fades slowly from the unclouded sky.
There was nothing dull in her immense placidity; it
was as living as the sea when under the August sun
it lay calm and shining along the Kentish coast. She
reminded me of a sonatina by an old Italian composer
with its wistfulness in which there is yet an
urbane flippancy and its light rippling gaiety in which
echoes still the trembling of a sigh. Sometimes, feeling
my eyes on her, she would turn round and for a
moment or two look me full in the face. She did not
speak. I did not know of what she was thinking.</p>

<p class="pindent">Once, I remember, I fetched her at Limpus Road,
and the maid, telling me she was not ready, asked
me to wait in the parlour. She came in. She was in
black velvet, with a picture hat covered with ostrich
feathers (we were going to the Pavilion and she had
dressed up for it) and she looked so lovely that it
took my breath away. I was staggered. The clothes
of that day gave a woman dignity and there was
something amazingly attractive in the way her virginal
beauty (sometimes she looked like the exquisite
statue of Psyche in the museum at Naples) contrasted
with the stateliness of her gown. She had
a trait that I think must be very rare: the skin under
her eyes, faintly blue, was all dewy. Sometimes I
could not persuade myself that it was natural, and
once I asked her if she had rubbed vaseline under her
eyes. That was just the effect it gave. She smiled,
took a handkerchief and handed it to me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Rub them and see,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">Then one night when we had walked home from
the Canterbury, and I was leaving her at her door,
when I held out my hand she laughed a little, a low
chuckle it was, and leaned forward.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You old silly,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">She kissed me on the mouth. It was not a hurried
peck, nor was it a kiss of passion. Her lips, those
very full red lips of hers, rested on mine long enough
for me to be conscious of their shape and their warmth
and their softness. Then she withdrew them, but
without hurry, in silence pushed open the door,
slipped inside, and left me. I was so startled that I
had not been able to say anything. I accepted her
kiss stupidly. I remained inert. I turned away and
walked back to my lodgings. I seemed to hear still in
my ears Rosie’s laughter. It was not contemptuous
or wounding, but frank and affectionate; it was as
though she laughed because she was fond of me.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XVI</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">I did</span> not go out with Rosie again for more than a
week. She was going down to Haversham to spend
a night with her mother. She had various engagements
in London. Then she asked me if I would go
to the Haymarket Theatre with her. The play was
a success and free seats were not to be had so we
made up our minds to go in the pit. We had a steak
and a glass of beer at the Café Monico and then
stood with the crowd. In those days there was no
orderly queue and when the doors were opened there
was a mad rush and scramble to get in. We were hot
and breathless and somewhat battered when at last
we pushed our way into our seats.</p>

<p class="pindent">We walked back through St. James’s Park. The
night was so lovely that we sat down on a bench.
In the starlight Rosie’s face and her fair hair glowed
softly. She was suffused, as it were (I express it awkwardly,
but I do not know how to describe the emotion
she gave me) with a friendliness at once candid
and tender. She was like a silvery flower of the night
that only gave its perfume to the moonbeams. I
slipped my arm round her waist and she turned her
face to mine. This time it was I who kissed. She did
not move; her soft red lips submitted to the pressure
of mine with a calm, intense passivity as the water
of a lake accepts the light of the moon. I don’t know
how long we stayed there.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m awfully hungry,” she said suddenly.</p>

<p class="pindent">“So am I,” I laughed.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Couldn’t we go and have some fish and chips
somewhere?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Rather.”</p>

<p class="pindent">In those days I knew my way very well about Westminster,
not yet a fashionable quarter for parliamentary
and otherwise cultured persons, but slummy
and down-at-heel; and after we had come out of the
park, crossing Victoria Street, I led Rosie to a fried
fish shop in Horseferry Row. It was late and the only
other person there was the driver of a four-wheeler
waiting outside. We ordered our fish and chips and
a bottle of beer. A poor woman came in and bought
two penn’orth of mixed and took it away with her in
a piece of paper. We ate with appetite.</p>

<p class="pindent">Our way back to Rosie’s led through Vincent
Square and as we passed my house I asked her:</p>

<p class="pindent">“Won’t you come in for a minute? You’ve never
seen my rooms.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What about your landlady? I don’t want to get
you into trouble.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, she sleeps like a rock.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll come in for a little.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I slipped my key into the lock and because the
passage was dark took Rosie’s hand to lead her in.
I lit the gas in my sitting room. She took off her hat
and vigorously scratched her head. Then she looked
for a glass, but I was very artistic and had taken
down the mirror that was over the chimney-piece and
there was no means in the room for anyone to see
what he looked like.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Come into my bedroom,” I said. “There’s a glass
there.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I opened the door and lit the candle. Rosie followed
me in and I held it up so that she should be able to
see herself. I looked at her in the glass as she arranged
her hair. She took two or three pins out,
which she put in her mouth, and taking one of my
brushes, brushed her hair up from the nape of the
neck. She twisted it, patted it, and put back the pins,
and as she was intent on this her eyes caught mine
in the glass and she smiled at me. When she had replaced
the last pin she turned and faced me; she did
not say anything; she looked at me tranquilly, still
with that little friendly smile in her blue eyes. I
put down the candle. The room was very small and
the dressing table was by the bed. She raised her hand
and softly stroked my cheek.</p>

<p class="pindent">I wish now that I had not started to write this
book in the first person singular. It is all very well
when you can show yourself in an amiable or touching
light; and nothing can be more effective than
the modest heroic or pathetic humorous which in this
mode is much cultivated; it is charming to write
about yourself when you see on the reader’s eyelash
the glittering tear and on his lips the tender smile;
but it is not so nice when you have to exhibit yourself
as a plain damned fool.</p>

<p class="pindent">A little while ago I read in the <span class="it">Evening Standard</span>
an article by Mr. Evelyn Waugh in the course of
which he remarked that to write novels in the first
person was a contemptible practice. I wish he had
explained why, but he merely threw out the statement
with just the same take-it-or-leave-it casualness
as Euclid used when he made his celebrated observation
about parallel straight lines. I was much
concerned and forthwith asked Alroy Kear (who
reads everything, even the books he writes prefaces
for) to recommend to me some works on the art of
fiction. On his advice I read <span class="it">The Craft of Fiction</span>
by Mr. Percy Lubbock, from which I learned that
the only way to write novels was like Henry James;
after that I read <span class="it">Aspects of the Novel</span> by Mr. E. M.
Forster, from which I learned that the only way to
write novels was like Mr. E. M. Forster; then I
read <span class="it">The Structure of the Novel</span> by Mr. Edwin
Muir, from which I learned nothing at all. In none
of them could I discover anything to the point at
issue. All the same I can find one reason why certain
novelists, such as Defoe, Sterne, Thackeray, Dickens,
Emily Brontë, and Proust, well known in their day
but now doubtless forgotten, have used the method
that Mr. Evelyn Waugh reprehends. As we grow
older we become more conscious of the complexity,
incoherence, and unreasonableness of human beings;
this indeed is the only excuse that offers for the
middle-aged or elderly writer, whose thoughts should
more properly be turned to graver matters, occupying
himself with the trivial concerns of imaginary
people. For if the proper study of mankind is man
it is evidently more sensible to occupy yourself with
the coherent, substantial, and significant creatures of
fiction than with the irrational and shadowy figures of
real life. Sometimes the novelist feels himself like
God and is prepared to tell you everything about his
characters; sometimes, however, he does not; and
then he tells you not everything that is to be known
about them but the little he knows himself; and since
as we grow older we feel ourselves less and less like
God I should not be surprised to learn that with advancing
years the novelist grows less and less inclined
to describe more than his own experience has
given him. The first person singular is a very useful
device for this limited purpose.</p>

<p class="pindent">Rosie raised her hand and softly stroked my face.
I do not know why I should have behaved as I then
did; it was not at all how I had seen myself behaving
on such an occasion. A sob broke from my tight throat.
I do not know whether it was because I was shy and
lonely (not lonely in the body, for I spent all day
at the hospital with all kinds of people, but lonely
in the spirit) or because my desire was so great, but
I began to cry. I felt terribly ashamed of myself; I
tried to control myself, I couldn’t; the tears welled
up in my eyes and poured down my cheeks. Rosie saw
them and gave a little gasp.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, honey, what is it? What’s the matter? Don’t.
Don’t!”</p>

<p class="pindent">She put her arms round my neck and began to cry
too, and she kissed my lips and my eyes and my wet
cheeks. She undid her bodice and lowered my head
till it rested on her bosom. She stroked my smooth
face. She rocked me back and forth as though I were
a child in her arms. I kissed her breasts and I kissed
the white column of her neck; and she slipped out
of her bodice and out of her skirt and her petticoats
and I held her for a moment by her corseted waist;
then she undid it, holding her breath for an instant
to enable her to do so, and stood before me in her
shift. When I put my hands on her sides I could feel
the ribbing of the skin from the pressure of the
corsets.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Blow out the candle,” she whispered.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was she who awoke me when the dawn peering
through the curtains revealed the shape of the bed
and of the wardrobe against the darkness of the
lingering night. She woke me by kissing me on the
mouth and her hair falling over my face tickled me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I must get up,” she said. “I don’t want your
landlady to see me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“There’s plenty of time.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Her breasts when she leaned over me were heavy
on my chest. In a little while she got out of bed. I
lit the candle. She turned to the glass and tied up
her hair and then she looked for a moment at her
naked body. Her waist was naturally small; though
so well developed she was very slender; her breasts
were straight and firm and they stood out from the
chest as though carved in marble. It was a body made
for the act of love. In the light of the candle, struggling
now with the increasing day, it was all silvery
gold; and the only colour was the rosy pink of the
hard nipples.</p>

<p class="pindent">We dressed in silence. She did not put on her corsets
again, but rolled them up and I wrapped them
in a piece of newspaper. We tiptoed along the passage
and when I opened the door and we stepped out into
the street the dawn ran to meet us like a cat leaping
up the steps. The square was empty; already the
sun was shining on the eastern windows. I felt as
young as the day. We walked arm in arm till we
came to the corner of Limpus Road.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Leave me here,” said Rosie. “One never knows.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I kissed her and I watched her walk away. She
walked rather slowly, with the firm tread of the
country woman who likes to feel the good earth under
her feet, and held herself erect. I could not go back
to bed. I strolled on till I came to the Embankment.
The river had the bright hues of the early morning.
A brown barge came down stream and passed under
Vauxhall Bridge. In a dinghy two men were rowing
close to the side. I was hungry.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XVII</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">After that</span> for more than a year whenever Rosie
came out with me she used on the way home to drop
into my rooms, sometimes for an hour, sometimes
till the breaking day warned us that the slaveys would
soon be scrubbing the doorsteps. I have a recollection
of warm sunny mornings when the tired air of
London had a welcome freshness, and of our footfalls
that seemed so noisy in the empty streets, and
then of scurrying along huddled under an umbrella,
silent but gay, when the winter brought cold and rain.
The policeman on point duty gave us a stare as we
passed, sometimes of suspicion; but sometimes also
there was a twinkle of comprehension in his eyes.
Now and then we would see a homeless creature huddled
up asleep in a portico and Rosie gave my arm
a friendly little pressure when (chiefly for show and
because I wanted to make a good impression on her,
for my shillings were scarce) I placed a piece of
silver on a shapeless lap or in a skinny fist. Rosie
made me very happy. I had a great affection for her.
She was easy and comfortable. She had a placidity
of temper that communicated itself to the people she
was with; you shared her pleasure in the passing
moment.</p>

<p class="pindent">Before I became her lover I had often asked myself
if she was the mistress of the others, Forde,
Harry Retford, and Hillier, and afterward I questioned
her. She kissed me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t be so silly. I like them, you know that. I like
to go out with them, but that’s all.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I wanted to ask her if she had been the mistress
of George Kemp, but I did not like to. Though I had
never seen her in a temper, I had a notion that she
had one and I vaguely felt that this was a question
that might anger her. I did not want to give her the
opportunity of saying things so wounding that I
could not forgive her. I was young, only just over
one and twenty, Quentin Forde and the others seemed
old to me; it did not seem unnatural to me that to
Rosie they were only friends. It gave me a little
thrill of pride to think that I was her lover. When
I used to look at her chatting and laughing with all
and sundry at tea on Saturday afternoons, I glowed
with self-satisfaction. I thought of the nights we
passed together and I was inclined to laugh at the
people who were so ignorant of my great secret. But
sometimes I thought that Lionel Hillier looked at
me in a quizzical way, as if he were enjoying a good
joke at my expense, and I asked myself uneasily if
Rosie had told him that she was having an affair with
me. I wondered if there was anything in my manner
that betrayed me. I told Rosie that I was afraid
Hillier suspected something; she looked at me with
those blue eyes of hers that always seemed ready to
smile.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t bother about it,” she said. “He’s got a
nasty mind.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I had never been intimate with Quentin Forde. He
looked upon me as a dull and insignificant young man
(which of course I was) and though he had always
been civil he had never taken any notice of me. I
thought it could only be my fancy that now he began
to be a little more frigid with me than before. But
one day Harry Retford to my surprise asked me to
dine with him and go to the play. I told Rosie.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, of course you must go. He’ll give you an
awfully good time. Good old Harry, he always makes
me laugh.”</p>

<p class="pindent">So I dined with him. He made himself very pleasant
and I was impressed to hear him talk of actors
and actresses. He had a sarcastic humour and was
very funny at the expense of Quentin Forde, whom
he did not like; I tried to get him to talk of Rosie,
but he had nothing to say of her. He seemed to be
a gay dog. With leers and laughing innuendoes he
gave me to understand that he was a devil with the
girls. I could not but ask myself if he was standing
me this dinner because he knew I was Rosie’s lover
and so felt friendly disposed toward me. But if he
knew, of course the others knew too. I hope I did
not show it, but in my heart I certainly felt somewhat
patronizing toward them.</p>

<p class="pindent">Then in winter, toward the end of January, someone
new appeared at Limpus Road. This was a
Dutch Jew named Jack Kuyper, a diamond merchant
from Amsterdam, who was spending a few weeks
in London on business. I do not know how he had
come to know the Driffields and whether it was esteem
for the author that brought him to the house,
but it was certainly not that which caused him to
come again. He was a tall, stout, dark man with a
bald head and a big hooked nose, a man of fifty, but
of a powerful appearance, sensual, determined, and
jovial. He made no secret of his admiration for
Rosie. He was rich apparently, for he sent her roses
every day; she chid him for his extravagance, but
was flattered. I could not bear him. He was blatant
and loud. I hated his fluent conversation in perfect
but foreign English; I hated the extravagant compliments
he paid Rosie; I hated the heartiness with
which he treated her friends. I found that Quentin
Forde liked him as little as I; we almost became
cordial with one another.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Mercifully he’s not staying long.” Quentin Forde
pursed his lips and raised his black eyebrows; with
his white hair and long sallow face he looked incredibly
gentlemanly. “Women are always the same;
they adore a bounder.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He’s so frightfully vulgar,” I complained.</p>

<p class="pindent">“That is his charm,” said Quentin Forde.</p>

<p class="pindent">For the next two or three weeks I saw next to
nothing of Rosie. Jack Kuyper took her out night
after night, to this smart restaurant and that, to one
play after another. I was vexed and hurt.</p>

<p class="pindent">“He doesn’t know anyone in London,” said Rosie,
trying to soothe my ruffled feelings. “He wants to
see everything he can while he’s here. It wouldn’t be
very nice for him to go alone all the time. He’s only
here for a fortnight more.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I did not see the object of this self-sacrifice on
her part.</p>

<p class="pindent">“But don’t you think he’s awful?” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“No. I think he’s fun. He makes me laugh.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you know that he’s absolutely gone on
you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, it pleases him and it doesn’t do me any
harm.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He’s old and fat and horrible. It gives me the
creeps to look at him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t think he’s so bad,” said Rosie.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You couldn’t have anything to do with him,” I
protested. “I mean, he’s such an awful cad.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Rosie scratched her head. It was an unpleasant
habit of hers.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s funny how different foreigners are from
English people,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">I was thankful when Jack Kuyper went back to
Amsterdam. Rosie had promised to dine with me the
day after and as a treat we arranged to dine in
Soho. She fetched me in a hansom and we drove on.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Has your horrible old man gone?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes,” she laughed.</p>

<p class="pindent">I put my arm round her waist. (I have elsewhere
remarked how much more convenient the
hansom was for this pleasant and indeed almost essential
act in human intercourse than the taxi of the
present day, so unwillingly refrain from labouring
the point.) I put my arm round her waist and kissed
her. Her lips were like spring flowers. We arrived.
I hung my hat and my coat (it was very long and
tight at the waist, with a velvet collar and velvet
cuffs; very smart) on a peg and asked Rosie to give
me her cape.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m going to keep it on,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’ll be awfully hot. You’ll only catch cold
when we go out.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t care. It’s the first time I’ve worn it. Don’t
you think it’s lovely. And look: the muff matches.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I gave the cape a glance. It was of fur. I did not
know it was sable.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It looks awfully rich. How did you get that?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Jack Kuyper gave it to me. We went and bought
it yesterday just before he went away.” She stroked
the smooth fur; she was as happy with it as a child
with a toy. “How much d’you think it cost?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I haven’t an idea.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Two hundred and sixty pounds. Do you know
I’ve never had anything that cost so much in my life?
I told him it was far too much, but he wouldn’t listen.
He made me have it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Rosie chuckled with glee and her eyes shone. But
I felt my face go stiff and a shiver run down my
spine.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Won’t Driffield think it’s rather funny, Kuyper
giving you a fur cape that costs all that?” said I,
trying to make my voice sound natural.</p>

<p class="pindent">Rosie’s eyes danced mischievously.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You know what Ted is, he never notices anything;
if he says anything about it I shall tell him I
gave twenty pounds for it in a pawnshop. He won’t
know any better.” She rubbed her face against the
collar. “It’s so soft. And everyone can see it cost
money.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I tried to eat and in order not to show the bitterness
in my heart I did my best to keep the conversation
going on one topic or another. Rosie did not
much mind what I said. She could only think of her
new cape and every other minute her eyes returned
to the muff that she insisted on holding on her lap.
She looked at it with an affection in which there was
something lazy, sensual, and self-complacent. I was
angry with her. I thought her stupid and common.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You look like a cat that’s swallowed a canary,”
I could not help snapping.</p>

<p class="pindent">She only giggled.</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s what I feel like.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Two hundred and sixty pounds was an enormous
sum to me. I did not know one <span class="it">could</span> pay so much
for a cape. I lived on fourteen pounds a month and
not at all badly either; and in case any reader is not
a ready reckoner I will add that this is one hundred
and sixty-eight pounds a year. I could not believe
that anyone would make as expensive a present as
that from pure friendship; what did it mean but that
Jack Kuyper had been sleeping with Rosie, night
after night, all the time he was in London, and now
when he went away was paying her? How could she
accept it? Didn’t she see how it degraded her? Didn’t
she see how frightfully vulgar it was of him to give
her a thing that cost so much? Apparently not, for
she said to me:</p>

<p class="pindent">“It was nice of him, wasn’t it? But then Jews are
always generous.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose he could afford it,” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes, he’s got lots of money. He said he
wanted to give me something before he went away
and asked me what I wanted. Well, I said, I could
do with a cape and a muff to match, but I never
thought he’d buy me anything like this. When we
went into the shop I asked them to show me something
in astrakhan, but he said: No, sable, and the
best money can buy. And when we saw this he absolutely
insisted on my having it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I thought of her with her white body, her skin so
milky, in the arms of that old fat gross man and his
thick loose lips kissing hers. And then I knew that
the suspicion that I had refused to believe was true;
I knew that when she went out to dinner with Quentin
Forde and Harry Retford and Lionel Hillier she
went to bed with them just as she came to bed with
me. I could not speak; I knew that if I did I should
insult her. I do not think I was jealous so much as
mortified. I felt that she had been making a damned
fool of me. I used all my determination to prevent
the bitter jibes from passing my lips.</p>

<p class="pindent">We went on to the theatre. I could not listen to
the play. I could only feel against my arm the
smoothness of the sable cape; I could only see her
fingers for ever stroking the muff. I could have borne
the thought of the others; it was Jack Kuyper who
horrified me. How could she? It was abominable to
be poor. I longed to have enough money to tell her
that if she would send the fellow back his beastly
furs I would give her better ones instead. At last she
noticed that I did not speak.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re very silent to-night.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Am I?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Aren’t you well?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Perfectly.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She gave me a sidelong look. I did not meet her
eyes, but I knew they were smiling with that smile
at once mischievous and childlike that I knew so
well. She said nothing more. At the end of the play,
since it was raining, we took a hansom and I gave
the driver her address in Limpus Road. She did not
speak till we got to Victoria Street, then she said:</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you want me to come home with you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Just as you like.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She lifted up the trap and gave the driver my address.
She took my hand and held it, but I remained
inert. I looked straight out of the window with angry
dignity. When we reached Vincent Square I handed
her out of the cab and let her into the house without
a word. I took off my hat and coat. She threw her
cape and her muff on the sofa.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why are you so sulky?” she asked, coming up
to me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m not sulky,” I answered, looking away.</p>

<p class="pindent">She took my face in her two hands.</p>

<p class="pindent">“How can you be so silly? Why should you be
angry because Jack Kuyper gives me a fur cape?
You can’t afford to give me one, can you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course I can’t.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“And Ted can’t either. You can’t expect me to
refuse a fur cape that cost two hundred and sixty
pounds. I’ve wanted a fur cape all my life. It means
nothing to Jack.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You don’t expect me to believe that he gave it
you just out of friendship.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He might have. Anyhow, he’s gone back to Amsterdam,
and who knows when he’ll come back?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He isn’t the only one, either.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I looked at Rosie now, with angry, hurt, resentful
eyes; she smiled at me, and I wish I knew how to
describe the sweet kindliness of her beautiful smile;
her voice was exquisitely gentle.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, my dear, why d’you bother your head about
any others? What harm does it do you? Don’t I give
you a good time? Aren’t you happy when you’re with
me?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Awfully.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, then. It’s so silly to be fussy and jealous.
Why not be happy with what you can get? Enjoy
yourself while you have the chance, I say; we shall
all be dead in a hundred years and what will anything
matter then? Let’s have a good time while
we can.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She put her arms round my neck and pressed her
lips against mine. I forgot my wrath. I only thought
of her beauty and her enveloping kindness.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You must take me as I am, you know,” she whispered.</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right,” I said.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XVIII</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">During all</span> this time I saw really very little of Driffield.
His editorship occupied much of his day and in
the evening he wrote. He was, of course, there every
Saturday afternoon, amiable and ironically amusing;
he appeared glad to see me and chatted with me for
a little while pleasantly of indifferent things; but
naturally most of his attention was given to guests
older and more important than I. But I had a feeling
that he was growing more aloof; he was no
longer the jolly, rather vulgar companion that I had
known at Blackstable. Perhaps it was only my increasing
sensibility that discerned as it were an invisible
barrier that existed between him and the
people he chaffed and joked with. It was as though
he lived a life of the imagination that made the life
of every day a little shadowy. He was asked to speak
now and then at public dinners. He joined a literary
club. He began to know a good many people outside
the narrow circle into which his writing had drawn
him, and he was increasingly asked to luncheon and
tea by the ladies who like to gather about them distinguished
authors. Rosie was asked too, but seldom
went; she said she didn’t care for parties, and after
all they didn’t want her, they only wanted Ted. I
think she was shy and felt out of it. It may be that
hostesses had more than once let her see how tiresome
they thought it that she must be included; and
after inviting her because it was polite, ignored her
because to be polite irked them.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was just about then that Edward Driffield published
<span class="it">The Cup of Life</span>. It is not my business to criticize
his works, and of late as much has been written
about them as must satisfy the appetite of any ordinary
reader; but I will permit myself to say that
<span class="it">The Cup of Life</span>, though certainly not the most celebrated
of his books, nor the most popular, is to my
mind the most interesting. It has a cold ruthlessness
that in all the sentimentality of English fiction strikes
an original note. It is refreshing and astringent. It
tastes of tart apples. It sets your teeth on edge, but
it has a subtle, bitter-sweet savour that is very agreeable
to the palate. Of all Driffield’s books it is the
only one I should like to have written. The scene of
the child’s death, terrible and heart-rending, but
written without slop or sickliness, and the curious
incident that follows it, cannot easily be forgotten
by anyone who has read them.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was this part of the book that caused the sudden
storm that burst on the wretched Driffield’s
head. For a few days after publication it looked as
though it would run its course like the rest of his
novels, namely that it would have substantial reviews,
laudatory on the whole but with reservations, and
that the sales would be respectable, but modest. Rosie
told me that he expected to make three hundred
pounds out of it and was talking of renting a house
on the river for the summer. The first two or three
notices were noncommittal; then in one of the morning
papers appeared a violent attack. There was a
column of it. The book was described as gratuitously
offensive, obscene, and the publishers were rated for
putting it before the public. Harrowing pictures
were drawn of the devastating effect it must have on
the youth of England. It was described as an insult
to womanhood. The reviewer protested against the
possibility of such a work falling into the hands of
young boys and innocent maidens. Other papers followed
suit. The more foolish demanded that the book
should be suppressed and some asked themselves
gravely if this was not a case where the public prosecutor
might with fitness intervene. Condemnation
was universal; if here and there a courageous writer,
accustomed to the more realistic tone of continental
fiction, asserted that Edward Driffield had never
written anything better, he was ignored. His honest
opinion was ascribed to a base desire to play to
the gallery. The libraries barred the book and the
lessors of the railway bookstalls refused to stock it.</p>

<p class="pindent">All this was naturally very unpleasant for Edward
Driffield, but he bore it with philosophic calm. He
shrugged his shoulders.</p>

<p class="pindent">“They say it isn’t true,” he smiled. “They can go
to hell. It is true.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He was supported in this trial by the fidelity of
his friends. To admire <span class="it">The Cup of Life</span> became a
mark of æsthetic acumen: to be shocked by it was
to confess yourself a philistine. Mrs. Barton Trafford
had no hesitation in saying that it was a masterpiece,
and though this wasn’t quite the moment for Barton’s
article in the <span class="it">Quarterly</span>, her faith in Edward Driffield’s
future remained unshaken. It is strange (and
instructive) to read now the book that created such
a sensation; there is not a word that could bring a
blush to the cheek of the most guileless, not an episode
that could cause the novel reader of the present
day to turn a hair.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XIX</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">About six</span> months later, when the excitement over
<span class="it">The Cup of Life</span> had subsided and Driffield had
already begun the novel which he published under
the name of <span class="it">By Their Fruits</span>, I, being then an impatient
dresser and in my fourth year, in the course
of my duties went one day into the main hall of the
hospital to await the surgeon whom I was accompanying
on his round of the wards. I glanced at the rack
in which letters were placed, for sometimes people,
not knowing my address in Vincent Square, wrote to
me at the hospital. I was surprised to find a telegram
for me. It ran as follows:</p>

<div class="blockquote-right90percent">

<p class="pindent"><span class="it">Please come and see me at five o’clock this afternoon
without fail. Important.</span></p>

<p class="line" style="text-align:right;margin-right:1em;"><span class="sc">Isabel Trafford.</span></p>

</div>

<p class="pindent">I wondered what she wanted me for. I had met
her perhaps a dozen times during the last two years,
but she had never taken any notice of me, and I had
never been to her house. I knew that men were scarce
at teatime and a hostess, short of them at the last
moment, might think that a young medical student
was better than nothing; but the wording of the telegram
hardly suggested a party.</p>

<p class="pindent">The surgeon for whom I dressed was prosy and
verbose. It was not till past five that I was free and
then it took me a good twenty minutes to get down
to Chelsea. Mrs. Barton Trafford lived in a block of
flats on the Embankment. It was nearly six when I
rang at her door and asked if she was at home. But
when I was ushered into her drawing room and began
to explain why I was late she cut me short.</p>

<p class="pindent">“We supposed you couldn’t get away. It doesn’t
matter.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Her husband was there.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I expect he’d like a cup of tea,” he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I think it’s rather late for tea, isn’t it?” She
looked at me gently, her mild, rather fine eyes full
of kindness. “You don’t want any tea, do you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was thirsty and hungry, for my lunch consisted
of a scone and butter and a cup of coffee, but I did
not like to say so. I refused tea.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do you know Allgood Newton?” asked Mrs.
Barton Trafford, with a gesture toward a man who
had been sitting in a big armchair when I was shown
in, and now got up. “I expect you’ve met him at Edward’s.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I had. He did not come often, but his name was
familiar to me and I remembered him. He made me
very nervous and I do not think I had ever spoken
to him. Though now completely forgotten, in those
days he was the best-known critic in England. He
was a large, fat, blond man, with a fleshy white face,
pale blue eyes, and graying fair hair. He generally
wore a pale blue tie to bring out the colour of his
eyes. He was very amiable to the authors he met at
Driffield’s and said charming and flattering things to
them, but when they were gone he was very amusing
at their expense. He spoke in a low, even voice, with
an apt choice of words: no one could with more point
tell a malicious story about a friend.</p>

<p class="pindent">Allgood Newton shook hands with me and Mrs.
Barton Trafford, with her ready sympathy, anxious
to put me at my ease, took me by the hand and made
me sit on the sofa beside her. The tea was still on
the table and she took a jam sandwich and delicately
nibbled it.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Have you seen the Driffields lately?” she asked
me as though making conversation.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I was there last Saturday.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You haven’t seen either of them since?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Barton Trafford looked from Allgood Newton
to her husband and back again as though mutely
demanding their help.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Nothing will be gained by circumlocution, Isabel,”
said Newton, a faintly malicious twinkle in his eye,
in his fat precise way.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Barton Trafford turned to me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then you don’t know that Mrs. Driffield has run
away from her husband.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What!”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was flabbergasted. I could not believe my ears.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Perhaps it would be better if you told him the
facts, Allgood,” said Mrs. Trafford.</p>

<p class="pindent">The critic leaned back in his chair and placed the
tips of the fingers of one hand against the tips of
the fingers of the other. He spoke with unction.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I had to see Edward Driffield last night about a
literary article that I am doing for him and after
dinner, since the night was fine, I thought I would
walk round to his house. He was expecting me; and
I knew besides that he never went out at night except
for some function as important as the Lord
Mayor’s banquet or the Academy dinner. Imagine
my surprise then, nay, my utter and complete bewilderment,
when as I approached I saw the door
of his house open and Edward in person emerge. You
know of course that Immanuel Kant was in the
habit of taking his daily walk at a certain hour
with such punctuality that the inhabitants of Königsberg
were accustomed to set their watches by the
event and when once he came out of his house an
hour earlier than usual they turned pale, for they
knew that this could only mean that some terrible
thing had happened. They were right; Immanuel
Kant had just received intelligence of the fall of the
Bastille.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Allgood Newton paused for a moment to mark the
effect of his anecdote. Mrs. Barton Trafford gave
him her understanding smile.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I did not envisage so world-shaking a catastrophe
as this when I saw Edward hurrying toward me, but
it immediately occurred to me that something untoward
was afoot. He carried neither cane nor gloves.
He wore his working coat, a venerable garment in
black alpaca, and a wide-awake hat. There was
something wild in his mien and distraught in his
bearing. I asked myself, knowing the vicissitudes
of the conjugal state, whether a matrimonial difference
had driven him headlong from the house or
whether he was hastening to a letter box in order
to post a letter. He sped like Hector flying, the
noblest of the Greeks. He did not seem to see me
and the suspicion flashed across my mind that he
did not want to. I stopped him. ‘Edward,’ I said.
He looked startled. For a moment I could have
sworn he did not know who I was. ‘What avenging
furies urge you with such hot haste through the rakish
purlieus of Pimlico?’ I asked. ‘Oh, it’s you,’ he said.
‘Where are you going?’ I asked. ‘Nowhere,’ he replied.”</p>

<p class="pindent">At this rate I thought Allgood Newton would never
finish his story and Mrs. Hudson would be vexed
with me for turning up to dinner half an hour late.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I told him on what errand I had come, and proposed
that we should return to his house where he
could more conveniently discuss the question that perturbed
me. ‘I’m too restless to go home,’ he said;
‘let’s walk. You can talk to me as we go along.’ Assenting,
I turned round and we began to walk; but
his pace was so rapid that I had to beg him to moderate
it. Even Dr. Johnson could not have carried on
a conversation when he was walking down Fleet
Street at the speed of an express train. Edward’s
appearance was so peculiar and his manner so agitated
that I thought it wise to lead him through the
less frequented streets. I talked to him of my article.
The subject that occupied me was more copious than
had at first sight appeared, and I was doubtful
whether after all I could do justice to it in the columns
of a weekly journal. I put the matter before
him fully and fairly and asked him his opinion.
‘Rosie has left me,’ he answered. For a moment I
did not know what he was talking about, but in a
trice it occurred to me that he was speaking of the
buxom and not unprepossessing female from whose
hands I had on occasion accepted a cup of tea. From
his tone I divined that he expected condolence from
me rather than felicitation.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Allgood Newton paused again and his blue eyes
twinkled.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’re wonderful, Allgood,” said Mrs. Barton
Trafford.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Priceless,” said her husband.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Realizing that the occasion demanded sympathy,
I said: ‘My dear fellow.’ He interrupted me. ‘I had
a letter by the last post,’ he said. ‘She’s run away with
Lord George Kemp.’ ”</p>

<p class="pindent">I gasped, but said nothing. Mrs. Trafford gave
me a quick look.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Who is Lord George Kemp?’ ‘He’s a Blackstable
man,’ he replied. I had little time to think. I
determined to be frank. ‘You’re well rid of her,’ I
said. ‘Allgood!’ he cried. I stopped and put my hand
on his arm. ‘You must know that she was deceiving
you with all your friends. Her behaviour was a
public scandal. My dear Edward, let us face the
fact: your wife was nothing but a common strumpet.’
He snatched his arm away from me and gave a sort
of low roar, like an orang-utan in the forests of
Borneo forcibly deprived of a cocoanut, and before
I could stop him he broke away and fled. I was so
startled that I could do nothing but listen to his
cries and his hurrying footsteps.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You shouldn’t have let him go,” said Mrs. Barton
Trafford. “In the state he was he might have thrown
himself in the Thames.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The thought occurred to me, but I noticed that he
did not run in the direction of the river, but plunged
into the meaner streets of the neighbourhood in
which we had been walking. And I reflected also that
there is no example in literary history of an author
committing suicide while engaged on the composition
of a literary work. Whatever his tribulations, he
is unwilling to leave to posterity an uncompleted
opus.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was astounded at what I heard and shocked and
dismayed; but I was worried too because I could not
make out why Mrs. Trafford had sent for me. She
knew me much too little to think that the story could
be of any particular interest to me; nor would she
have troubled to let me hear it as a piece of news.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Poor Edward,” she said. “Of course no one can
deny that it is a blessing in disguise, but I’m afraid
he’ll take it very much to heart. Fortunately he’s
done nothing rash.” She turned to me. “As soon as
Mr. Newton told us about it I went round to Limpus
Road. Edward was out, but the maid said he’d only
just gone; that means that he must have gone home
between the time he ran away from Allgood and
this morning. You’ll wonder why I asked you to
come and see me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I did not answer. I waited for her to go on.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It was at Blackstable you first knew the Driffields,
wasn’t it? You can tell us who is this Lord
George Kemp. Edward said he was a Blackstable
man.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“He’s middle-aged. He’s got a wife and two sons.
They’re as old as I am.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“But I don’t understand who he can be. I can’t
find him either in <span class="it">Who’s Who</span> or in Debrett.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I almost laughed.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, he’s not really a lord. He’s the local coal
merchant. They call him Lord George at Blackstable
because he’s so grand. It’s just a joke.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The quiddity of bucolic humour is often a trifle
obscure to the uninitiated,” said Allgood Newton.</p>

<p class="pindent">“We must all help dear Edward in every way we
can,” said Mrs. Barton Trafford. Her eyes rested
on me thoughtfully. “If Kemp has run away with
Rosie Driffield he must have left his wife.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose so,” I replied.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Will you do something very kind?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“If I can.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Will you go down to Blackstable and find out exactly
what has happened? I think we ought to get in
touch with the wife.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I have never been very fond of interfering in other
people’s affairs.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t know how I could do that,” I answered.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Couldn’t you see her?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, I couldn’t.”</p>

<p class="pindent">If Mrs. Barton Trafford thought my reply blunt
she did not show it. She smiled a little.</p>

<p class="pindent">“At all events that can be left over. The urgent
thing is to go down and find out about Kemp. I shall
try to see Edward this evening. I can’t bear the
thought of his staying on in that odious house by
himself. Barton and I have made up our minds to
bring him here. We have a spare room and I’ll arrange
it so that he can work there. Don’t you agree
that that would be the best thing for him, Allgood?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Absolutely.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“There’s no reason why he shouldn’t stay here indefinitely,
at all events for a few weeks, and then he
can come away with us in the summer. We’re going
to Brittany. I’m sure he’d like that. It would be a
thorough change for him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“The immediate question,” said Barton Trafford,
fixing on me an eye nearly as kindly as his wife’s, “is
whether this young sawbones will go to Blackstable
and find out what he can. We must know where we
are. That is essential.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Barton Trafford excused his interest in archæology
by a hearty manner and a jocose, even slangy way
of speech.</p>

<p class="pindent">“He couldn’t refuse,” said his wife, giving me a
soft, appealing glance. “You won’t refuse, will you?
It’s so important and you’re the only person who
can help us.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Of course she did not know that I was as anxious
to find out what had happened as she; she could
not tell what a bitter jealous pain stabbed my heart.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I couldn’t possibly get away from the hospital
before Saturday,” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’ll do. It’s very good of you. All Edward’s
friends will be grateful to you. When shall you return?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I have to be back in London early on Monday
morning.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then come and have tea with me in the afternoon.
I shall await you with impatience. Thank God,
that’s settled. Now I must try and get hold of Edward.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I understood that I was dismissed. Allgood Newton
took his leave and came downstairs with me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Our Isabel has <span class="it">un petit air</span> of Catherine of
Aragon to-day that I find vastly becoming,” he murmured
when the door was closed behind us. “This
is a golden opportunity and I think we may safely
trust our friend not to miss it. A charming woman
with a heart of gold. <span class="it">Venus toute entière à sa proie
attachée.</span>”</p>

<p class="pindent">I did not understand what he meant, for what I
have already told the reader about Mrs. Barton
Trafford I only learned much later, but I realized
that he was saying something vaguely malicious about
her, and probably amusing, so I sniggered.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose your youth inclines you to what my
good Dizzy named in an unlucky moment the gondola
of London.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m going to take a bus,” I answered.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh? Had you proposed to go by hansom I was
going to ask you to be good enough to drop me on
your way, but if you are going to use the homely conveyance
which <span class="it">I</span> in my old-fashioned manner still
prefer to call an omnibus, I shall hoist my unwieldy
carcase into a four-wheeler.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He signalled to one and gave me two flabby fingers
to shake.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I shall come on Monday to hear the result of
what dear Henry would call your so exquisitely delicate
mission.”</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XX</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">But it</span> was years before I saw Allgood Newton again,
for when I got to Blackstable I found a letter from
Mrs. Barton Trafford (who had taken the precaution
to note my address) asking me, for reasons that
she would explain when she saw me, not to come to
her flat but to meet her at six o’clock in the first-class
waiting room at Victoria Station. As soon then as I
could get away from the hospital on Monday I made
my way there, and after waiting for a while saw her
come in. She came toward me with little tripping
steps.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, have you anything to tell me? Let us find
a quiet corner and sit down.”</p>

<p class="pindent">We sought a place and found it.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I must explain why I asked you to come here,”
she said. “Edward is staying with me. At first he did
not want to come, but I persuaded him. But he’s
nervous and ill and irritable. I did not want to run
the risk of his seeing you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I told Mrs. Trafford the bare facts of my story
and she listened attentively. Now and then she
nodded her head. But I could not hope to make her
understand the commotion I had found at Blackstable.
The town was beside itself with excitement.
Nothing so thrilling had happened there for years
and no one could talk of anything else. Humpty-dumpty
had had a great fall. Lord George Kemp
had absconded. About a week before he had announced
that he had to go up to London on business,
and two days later a petition in bankruptcy
was filed against him. It appeared that his building
operations had not been successful, his attempt to
make Blackstable into a frequented seaside resort
meeting with no response, and he had been forced
to raise money in every way he could. All kinds of
rumours ran through the little town. Quite a number
of small people who had entrusted their savings to
him were faced with the loss of all they had. The
details were vague, for neither my uncle nor my
aunt knew anything of business matters, nor had I
the knowledge to make what they told me comprehensible.
But there was a mortgage on George
Kemp’s house and a bill of sale on his furniture. His
wife was left without a penny. His two sons, lads
of twenty and twenty-one, were in the coal business,
but that, too, was involved in the general ruin. George
Kemp had gone off with all the cash he could lay
hands on, something like fifteen hundred pounds, they
said, though how they knew I cannot imagine; and
it was reported that a warrant had been issued for
his arrest. It was supposed that he had left the country;
some said he had gone to Australia and some
to Canada.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I hope they catch him,” said my uncle. “He ought
to get penal servitude for life.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The indignation was universal. They could not
forgive him because he had always been so noisy
and boisterous, because he had chaffed them and
stood them drinks and given them garden parties, because
he had driven such a smart trap and worn his
brown billycock hat at such a rakish angle. But it
was on Sunday night after church in the vestry that
the churchwarden told my uncle the worst. For the
last two years he had been meeting Rosie Driffield
at Haversham almost every week and they had been
spending the night together at a public house. The
licensee of this had put money into one of Lord
George’s wildcat schemes, and on discovering that
he had lost it blurted out the whole story. He could
have borne it if Lord George had defrauded others,
but that he should defraud him who had done him
a good turn and whom he looked upon as a chum,
that was the limit.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I expect they’ve run away together,” said my
uncle.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I shouldn’t be surprised,” said the churchwarden.</p>

<p class="pindent">After supper, while the housemaid was clearing
away, I went into the kitchen to talk to Mary-Ann.
She had been at church and had heard the story too.
I cannot believe that the congregation had listened
very attentively to my uncle’s sermon.</p>

<p class="pindent">“The vicar says they’ve run away together,” I
said. I had not breathed a word of what I knew.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, of course they ’ave,” said Mary-Ann. “He
was the only man she ever really fancied. He only
’ad to lift ’is little finger and she’d leave anyone no
matter who it was.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I lowered my eyes. I was suffering from bitter
mortification; and I was angry with Rosie: I thought
she had behaved very badly to me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose we shall never see her again,” I said.
It gave me a pang to utter the words.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t suppose we shall,” said Mary-Ann cheerfully.</p>

<p class="pindent">When I had told Mrs. Barton Trafford as much
of this story as I thought she need know, she sighed,
but whether from satisfaction or distress I had no
notion.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, that’s the end of Rosie at all events,” she
said. She got up and held out her hand. “Why will
these literary men make these unfortunate marriages?
It’s all very sad, very sad. Thank you so much for
what you’ve done. We know where we are now. The
great thing is that it shouldn’t interfere with Edward’s
work.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Her remarks seemed a trifle disconnected to me.
The fact was, I have no doubt, that she was giving
me not the smallest thought. I led her out of Victoria
Station and put her into a bus that went down
the King’s Road, Chelsea; then I walked back to my
lodgings.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XXI</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">I lost</span> touch with Driffield. I was too shy to seek
him out; I was busy with my examinations, and when
I had passed them I went abroad. I remember vaguely
to have seen in the paper that he had divorced Rosie.
Nothing more was heard of her. Small sums reached
her mother occasionally, ten or twenty pounds, and
they came in a registered letter with a New York
postmark; but no address was given, no message
enclosed, and they were presumed to come from
Rosie only because no one else could possibly send
Mrs. Gann money. Then in the fullness of years
Rosie’s mother died, and it may be supposed that
in some way the news reached her, for the letters
ceased to come.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XXII</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">Alroy Kear</span> and I, as arranged, met on Friday at
Victoria Station to catch the five ten to Blackstable.
We made ourselves comfortable in opposite corners
of a smoking compartment. From him I now learned
roughly what had happened to Driffield after his wife
ran away from him. Roy had in due course become
very intimate with Mrs. Barton Trafford. Knowing
him and remembering her, I realized that this was
inevitable. I was not surprised to hear that he had
travelled with her and Barton on the continent, sharing
with them to the full their passion for Wagner,
post-impressionist painting, and baroque architecture.
He had lunched assiduously at the flat in Chelsea
and when advancing years and failing health had imprisoned
Mrs. Trafford to her drawing room, notwithstanding
the many claims on his time he had gone
regularly once a week to sit with her. He had a good
heart. After her death he wrote an article about her
in which with admirable emotion he did justice to her
great gifts of sympathy and discrimination.</p>

<p class="pindent">It pleased me to think that his kindliness should
receive its due and unexpected reward, for Mrs.
Barton Trafford had told him much about Edward
Driffield that could not fail to be of service to him
in the work of love in which he was now engaged.
Mrs. Barton Trafford, exercising a gentle violence,
not only took Edward Driffield into her house when
the flight of his faithless wife left him what Roy
could only describe by the French word <span class="it">désemparé</span>,
but persuaded him to stay for nearly a year. She
gave him the loving care, the unfailing kindness, and
the intelligent understanding of a woman who combined
feminine tact with masculine vigour, a heart
of gold with an unerring eye for the main chance.
It was in her flat that he finished <span class="it">By Their Fruits</span>.
She was justified in looking upon it as her book and
the dedication to her is a proof that Driffield was
not unmindful of his debt. She took him to Italy
(with Barton of course, for Mrs. Trafford knew
too well how malicious people were, to give occasion
for scandal) and with a volume of Ruskin in her
hand revealed to Edward Driffield the immortal
beauties of that country. Then she found him rooms
in the Temple and arranged little luncheons there,
she acting very prettily the part of hostess, where
he could receive the persons whom his increasing
reputation attracted.</p>

<p class="pindent">It must be admitted that this increasing reputation
was very largely due to her. His great celebrity came
only during his last years when he had long ceased
to write, but the foundations of it were undoubtedly
laid by Mrs. Trafford’s untiring efforts. Not only
did she inspire (and perhaps write not a little, for
she had a dexterous pen) the article that Barton at
last contributed to the <span class="it">Quarterly</span> in which the claim
was first made that Driffield must be ranked with
the masters of British fiction, but as each book came
out she organized its reception. She went here and
there, seeing editors and, more important still, proprietors
of influential organs; she gave soirées to
which everyone was invited who could be of use. She
persuaded Edward Driffield to give readings at the
houses of the very great for charitable purposes; she
saw to it that his photographs should appear in the
illustrated weeklies; she revised personally any interview
he gave. For ten years she was an indefatigable
press agent. She kept him steadily before the
public.</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Barton Trafford had a grand time, but she
did not get above herself. It was useless indeed to
ask him to a party without her; he refused. And when
she and Barton and Driffield were invited anywhere
to dinner they came together and went together. She
never let him out of her sight. Hostesses might rave;
they could take it or leave it. As a rule they took it.
If Mrs. Barton Trafford happened to be a little out
of temper it was through him she showed it, for while
she remained charming, Edward Driffield would be
uncommonly gruff. But she knew exactly how to draw
him out and when the company was distinguished
could make him brilliant. She was perfect with him.
She never concealed from him her conviction that he
was the greatest writer of his day; she not only referred
to him invariably as the master, but, perhaps
a little playfully and yet how flatteringly, addressed
him always as such. To the end she retained something
kittenish.</p>

<p class="pindent">Then a terrible thing happened. Driffield caught
pneumonia and was extremely ill; for some time his
life was despaired of. Mrs. Barton Trafford did
everything that such a woman could do, and would
willingly have nursed him herself, but she was frail,
she was indeed over sixty, and he had to have professional
nurses. When at last he pulled through, the
doctors said that he must go into the country, and
since he was still extremely weak insisted that a nurse
should go with him. Mrs. Trafford wanted him to
go to Bournemouth so that she could run down for
week-ends and see that everything was well with
him, but Driffield had a fancy for Cornwall, and
the doctors agreed that the mild airs of Penzance
would suit him. One would have thought that a
woman of Isabel Trafford’s delicate intuition would
have had some foreboding of ill. No. She let him
go. She impressed on the nurse that she entrusted
her with a grave responsibility; she placed in her
hands, if not the future of English literature, at
least the life and welfare of its most distinguished
living representative. It was a priceless charge.</p>

<p class="pindent">Three weeks later Edward Driffield wrote and
told her that he had married his nurse by special
license.</p>

<p class="pindent">I imagine that never did Mrs. Barton Trafford exhibit
more preëminently her greatness of soul than
in the manner in which she met this situation. Did
she cry, Judas, Judas? Did she tear her hair and
fall on the floor and kick her heels in an attack of
hysterics? Did she turn on the mild and learned Barton
and call him a blithering old fool? Did she inveigh
against the faithlessness of men and the wantonness
of women or did she relieve her wounded
feelings by shouting at the top of her voice a string
of those obscenities with which the alienists tell us
the chastest females are surprisingly acquainted? Not
at all. She wrote a charming letter of congratulation
to Driffield and she wrote to his bride telling her that
she was glad to think that now she would have two
loving friends instead of one. She begged them both
to come and stay with her on their return to London.
She told everyone she met that the marriage had
made her very, very happy, for Edward Driffield
would soon be an old man and must have someone
to take care of him; who could do this better than
a hospital nurse? She never had anything but praise
for the new Mrs. Driffield; she was not exactly
pretty, she said, but she had a very nice face; of
course she wasn’t quite, quite a lady, but Edward
would only have been uncomfortable with anyone
too grand. She was just the sort of wife for him. I
think it may be not unjustly said that Mrs. Barton
Trafford fairly ran over with the milk of human
kindness, but all the same I have an inkling that if
ever the milk of human kindness was charged with
vitriol, here was a case in point.</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XXIII</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">When we</span> arrived at Blackstable, Roy and I, a car,
neither ostentatiously grand nor obviously cheap,
was waiting for him and the chauffeur had a note for
me asking me to lunch with Mrs. Driffield next day.
I got into a taxi and went to the Bear and Key. I
had learned from Roy that there was a new Marine
Hotel on the front, but I did not propose for the
luxuries of civilization to abandon a resort of my
youth. Change met me at the railway station, which
was not in its old place, but up a new road, and of
course it was strange to be driven down the High
Street in a car. But the Bear and Key was unaltered.
It received me with its old churlish indifference: there
was no one at the entrance, the driver put my bag
down and drove away; I called, no one answered;
I went into the bar and found a young lady with
shingled hair reading a book by Mr. Compton
Mackenzie. I asked her if I could have a room. She
gave me a slightly offended look and said she thought
so, but as that seemed to exhaust her interest in the
matter I asked politely whether there was anyone
who could show it to me. She got up and, opening a
door, in a shrill voice called: “Katie.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What is it?” I heard.</p>

<p class="pindent">“There’s a gent wants a room.”</p>

<p class="pindent">In a little while appeared an ancient and haggard
female in a very dirty print dress, with an untidy
mop of gray hair, and showed me, two flights up, a
very small grubby room.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Can’t you do something better than that for me?”
I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s the room commercials generally ’ave,” she
answered with a sniff.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Haven’t you got any others?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not single.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then give me a double room.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll go and ask Mrs. Brentford.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I accompanied her down to the first floor and she
knocked at a door. She was told to come in, and when
she opened it I caught sight of a stout woman with
gray hair elaborately marcelled. She was reading a
book. Apparently everyone at the Bear and Key was
interested in literature. She gave me an indifferent
look when Katie said I wasn’t satisfied with number
seven.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Show him number five,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">I began to feel that I had been a trifle rash in declining
so haughtily Mrs. Driffield’s invitation to stay
with her and then putting aside in my sentimental
way Roy’s wise suggestion that I should stay at the
Marine Hotel. Katie took me upstairs again and
ushered me into a largish room looking on the High
Street. Most of its space was occupied by a double
bed. The windows had certainly not been opened for
a month.</p>

<p class="pindent">I said that would do and asked about dinner.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You can ’ave what you like,” said Katie. “We
’aven’t got nothing in, but I’ll run round and get it.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Knowing English inns, I ordered a fried sole and
a grilled chop. Then I went for a stroll. I walked
down to the beach and found that they had built an
esplanade and there was a row of bungalows and
villas where I remembered only windswept fields.
But they were seedy and bedraggled and I guessed
that even after all these years Lord George’s dream
of turning Blackstable into a popular seaside resort
had not come true. A retired military man, a pair of
elderly ladies walked along the crumbling asphalt.
It was incredibly dreary. A chill wind was blowing
and a light drizzle swept over from the sea.</p>

<p class="pindent">I went back into town and here, in the space between
the Bear and Key and the Duke of Kent, were
little knots of men standing about notwithstanding
the inclement weather; and their eyes had the same
pale blue, their high cheek bones the same ruddy
colour as that of their fathers before them. It was
strange to see that some of the sailors in blue jerseys
still wore little gold rings in their ears; and not only
old ones but boys scarcely out of their teens. I sauntered
down the street and there was the bank refronted,
but the stationery shop where I had bought
paper and wax to make rubbings with an obscure
writer whom I had met by chance was unchanged;
there were two or three cinemas and their garish
posters suddenly gave the prim street a dissipated
air so that it looked like a respectable elderly woman
who had taken a drop too much.</p>

<p class="pindent">It was cold and cheerless in the commercial room
where I ate my dinner alone at a large table laid for
six. I was served by the slatternly Katie. I asked if
I could have a fire.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not in June,” she said. “We don’t ’ave fires after
April.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll pay for it,” I protested.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Not in June. In October, yes, but not in June.”</p>

<p class="pindent">When I had finished I went into the bar to have
a glass of port.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Very quiet,” I said to the shingled barmaid.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, it is quiet,” she answered.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I should have thought on a Friday night you’d
have quite a lot of people in here.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, one would think that, wouldn’t one?”</p>

<p class="pindent">Then a stout red-faced man with a close-cropped
head of gray hair came in from the back and I guessed
that this was my host.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Are you Mr. Brentford?” I asked him.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, that’s me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I knew your father. Will you have a glass of
port?”</p>

<p class="pindent">I told him my name, in the days of his boyhood better
known than any other at Blackstable, but somewhat
to my mortification I saw that it aroused no
echo in his memory. He consented, however, to let
me stand him a glass of port.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Down here on business?” he asked me. “We get
quite a few commercial gents at one time and another.
We always like to do what we can for them.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I told him that I had come down to see Mrs. Driffield
and left him to guess on what errand.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I used to see a lot of the old man,” said Mr.
Brentford. “He used to be very partial to dropping
in here and having his glass of bitter. Mind you, I
don’t say he ever got tiddly, but he used to like to
sit in the bar and talk. My word, he’d talk by the
hour and he never cared who he talked to. Mrs. Driffield
didn’t half like his coming here. He’d slip away,
out of the house, without saying a word to anybody,
and come toddling down. You know it’s a bit of a
walk for a man of that age. Of course when they
missed him Mrs. Driffield knew where he was, and
she used to telephone and ask if he was here. Then
she’d drive over in the car and go in and see my
wife. ‘You go in and fetch him, Mrs. Brentford,’
she’d say; ‘I don’t like to go in the bar meself, not
with all those men hanging about’; so Mrs. Brentford
would come in and she’d say, ‘Now Mr. Driffield,
Mrs. Driffield’s come for you in the car, so
you’d better finish your beer and let her take you
home.’ He used to ask Mrs. Brentford not to say
he was here when Mrs. Driffield rang up, but of
course we couldn’t do that. He was an old man and
all that and we didn’t want to take the responsibility.
He was born in this parish, you know, and his first
wife, she was a Blackstable girl. She’s been dead these
many years. I never knew her. He was a funny old
fellow. No side, you know; they tell me they thought
a rare lot of him in London and when he died the
papers were full of him; but you’d never have known
it to talk to him. He might have been just nobody like
you and me. Of course we always tried to make him
comfortable; we tried to get him to sit in one of
them easy chairs, but no, he must sit up at the bar;
he said he liked to feel his feet on a rail. My belief
is he was happier here than anywhere. He always
said he liked a bar parlour. He said you saw life
there and he said he’d always loved life. Quite a
character he was. Reminded me of my father, except
that my old governor never read a book in his life
and he drank a bottle of French brandy a day and
he was seventy-eight when he died and his last illness
was his first. I quite missed old Driffield when
he popped off. I was only saying to Mrs. Brentford
the other day, I’d like to read one of his books some
time. They tell me he wrote several about these
parts.”</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XXIV</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">Next morning</span> it was cold and raw, but it was not
raining, and I walked down the High Street toward
the vicarage. I recognized the names over the shops,
the Kentish names that have been borne for centuries—the
Ganns, the Kemps, the Cobbs, the Igguldens—but
I saw no one that I knew. I felt like a
ghost walking down that street where I had once
known nearly everyone, if not to speak to, at least
by sight. Suddenly a very shabby little car passed
me, stopped, and backed, and I saw someone looking
at me curiously. A tall, heavy elderly man got out
and came toward me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Aren’t you Willie Ashenden?” he asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">Then I recognized him. He was the doctor’s son,
and I had been at school with him; we had passed
from form to form together, and I knew that he had
succeeded his father in his practice.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Hullo, how are you?” he asked. “I’ve just been
along to the vicarage to see my grandson. It’s a
preparatory school now, you know, and I put him
there at the beginning of this term.”</p>

<p class="pindent">He was shabbily dressed and unkempt, but he
had a fine head and I saw that in youth he must have
had unusual beauty. It was funny that I had never
noticed it.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Are you a grandfather?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Three times over,” he laughed.</p>

<p class="pindent">It gave me a shock. He had drawn breath, walked
the earth and presently grown to man’s estate, married,
had children and they in turn had had children;
I judged from the look of him that he had lived,
with incessant toil, in penury. He had the peculiar
manner of the country doctor, bluff, hearty, and
unctuous. His life was over. I had plans in my head
for books and plays, I was full of schemes for the
future; I felt that a long stretch of activity and fun
still lay before me; and yet, I supposed, to others I
must seem the elderly man that he seemed to me. I
was so shaken that I had not the presence of mind
to ask about his brothers whom as a child I had
played with, or about the old friends who had been
my companions; after a few foolish remarks I left
him. I walked on to the vicarage, a roomy, rambling
house too far out of the way for the modern incumbent
who took his duties more seriously than did my
uncle and too large for the present cost of living. It
stood in a big garden and was surrounded by green
fields. There was a great square notice board that
announced that it was a preparatory school for the
sons of gentlemen and gave the name and the degrees
of the head master. I looked over the paling;
the garden was squalid and untidy and the pond in
which I used to fish for roach was choked up. The
glebe fields had been cut up into building lots. There
were rows of little brick houses with bumpy ill-made
roads. I walked along Joy Lane and there were
houses here too, bungalows facing the sea; and the
old turnpike house was a trim tea shop.</p>

<p class="pindent">I wandered about here and there. There seemed
innumerable streets of little houses of yellow brick,
but I do not know who lived in them for I saw no one
about. I went down to the harbour. It was deserted.
There was but one tramp lying a little way out from
the pier. Two or three sailormen were sitting outside
a warehouse and they stared at me as I passed. The
bottom had fallen out of the coal trade and colliers
came to Blackstable no longer.</p>

<p class="pindent">Then it was time for me to go to Ferne Court and
I went back to the Bear and Key. The landlord had
told me that he had a Daimler for hire and I had
arranged that it should take me to my luncheon. It
stood at the door when I came up, a brougham, but
the oldest, most dilapidated car of its make that I
had ever seen; it panted along with squeaks and
thumps and rattlings, with sudden angry jerks, so that
I wondered if I should ever reach my destination.
But the extraordinary, the amazing thing about it
was that it smelled exactly like the old landau which
my uncle used to hire every Sunday morning to go
to church in. This was a rank odour of stables and of
stale straw that lay at the bottom of the carriage;
and I wondered in vain why, after all these years,
the motor car should have it too. But nothing can
bring back the past like a perfume or a stench, and,
oblivious to the country I was trundling through, I
saw myself once more a little boy on the front seat
with the communion plate beside me and, facing
me, my aunt, smelling slightly of clean linen and eau
de cologne, in her black silk cloak and her little bonnet
with a feather, and my uncle in his cassock, a
broad band of ribbed silk round his ample waist and
a gold cross hanging over his stomach from the gold
chain round his neck.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Now, Willie, mind you behave nicely to-day.
You’re not to turn round, and sit up properly in
your seat. The Lord’s House isn’t the place to loll
in and you must remember that you should set an
example to other little boys who haven’t had your
advantages.”</p>

<p class="pindent">When I arrived at Ferne Court Mrs. Driffield and
Roy were walking round the garden and they came
up to me as I got out of the car.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I was showing Roy my flowers,” said Mrs. Driffield,
as she shook hands with me. And then with a
sigh: “They’re all I have now.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She looked no older than when last I saw her six
years before. She wore her weeds with quiet distinction.
At her neck was a collar of white crêpe and at
her wrists cuffs of the same. Roy, I noticed, wore with
his neat blue suit a black tie; I supposed it was a sign
of respect for the illustrious dead.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll just show you my herbaceous borders,” said
Mrs. Driffield, “and then we’ll go in to lunch.”</p>

<p class="pindent">We walked round and Roy was very knowledgeable.
He knew what all the flowers were called, and
the Latin names tripped off his tongue like cigarettes
out of a cigarette-making machine. He told Mrs.
Driffield where she ought to get certain varieties that
she absolutely must have and how perfectly lovely
were certain others.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Shall we go in through Edward’s study?” suggested
Mrs. Driffield. “I keep it exactly as it was
when he was here. I haven’t changed a thing. You’d
be surprised how many people come over to see the
house, and of course above all they want to see the
room he worked in.”</p>

<p class="pindent">We went in through an open window. There was
a bowl of roses on the desk and on a little round table
by the side of the armchair a copy of the <span class="it">Spectator</span>.
In the ash trays were the master’s pipes and there was
ink in the inkstand. The scene was perfectly set. I
do not know why the room seemed so strangely dead;
it had already the mustiness of a museum. Mrs.
Driffield went to the bookshelves and with a little
smile, half playful, half sad, passed a rapid hand
across the back of half a dozen volumes bound in
blue.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You know that Edward admired your work so
much,” said Mrs. Driffield. “He reread your books
quite often.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m very glad to think that,” I said politely.</p>

<p class="pindent">I knew very well that they had not been there on
my last visit and in a casual way I took one of them
out and ran my fingers along the top to see whether
there was dust on it. There was not. Then I took
another book down, one of Charlotte Brontë’s, and
making a little plausible conversation tried the same
experiment. No, there was no dust there either. All
I learned was that Mrs. Driffield was an excellent
housekeeper and had a conscientious maid.</p>

<p class="pindent">We went in to luncheon, a hearty British meal of
roast beef and Yorkshire pudding, and we talked of
the work on which Roy was engaged.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I want to spare dear Roy all the labour I can,”
said Mrs. Driffield, “and I’ve been gathering together
as much of the material as I could myself.
Of course it’s been rather painful, but it’s been very
interesting, too. I came across a lot of old photographs
that I must show you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">After luncheon we went into the drawing room
and I noticed again with what perfect tact Mrs.
Driffield had arranged it. It suited the widow of a
distinguished man of letters almost more than it
had suited the wife. Those chintzes, those bowls of
pot-pourri, those Dresden china figures—there was
about them a faint air of regret; they seemed to reflect
pensively upon a past of distinction. I could have
wished on this chilly day that there were a fire in the
grate, but the English are a hardy as well as a conservative
race; and it is not difficult for them to maintain
their principles at the cost of the discomfort of
others. I doubted whether Mrs. Driffield would have
conceived the possibility of lighting a fire before the
first of October. She asked me whether I had lately
seen the lady who had brought me to lunch with the
Driffields, and I surmised from her faint acerbity
that since the death of her eminent husband the great
and fashionable had shown a distinct tendency to
take no further notice of her. We were just settling
down to talk about the defunct; Roy and Mrs. Driffield
were putting artful questions to incite me to
disclose my recollections and I was gathering my wits
about me so that I should not in an unguarded moment
let slip anything that I had made up my mind
to keep to myself; when suddenly the trim parlour-maid
brought in two cards on a small salver.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Two gentlemen in a car, mum, and they say, could
they look at the house and garden?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What a bore!” cried Mrs. Driffield, but with astonishing
alacrity. “Isn’t it funny I should have been
speaking just now about the people who want to see
the house? I never have a moment’s peace.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, why don’t you say you’re sorry you can’t
see them?” said Roy, with what I thought a certain
cattiness.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, I couldn’t do that. Edward wouldn’t have
liked me to.” She looked at the cards. “I haven’t got
my glasses on me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She handed them to me, and on one I read “Henry
Beard MacDougal, University of Virginia”; and in
pencil was written: “Assistant professor in English
Literature.” The other was “Jean-Paul Underhill”
and there was at the bottom an address in New York.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Americans,” said Mrs. Driffield. “Say I shall be
very pleased if they’ll come in.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Presently the maid ushered the strangers in. They
were both tall young men and broad-shouldered, with
heavy, clean-shaven, swarthy faces, and handsome
eyes; they both wore horn-rimmed spectacles and they
both had thick black hair combed straight back from
their foreheads. They both wore English suits that
were evidently brand new; they were both slightly
embarrassed, but verbose and extremely civil. They
explained that they were making a literary tour of
England and, being admirers of Edward Driffield,
had taken the liberty of stopping off on their way to
Rye to visit Henry James’s house in the hope that
they would be permitted to see a spot sanctified by
so many associations. The reference to Rye did not
go down very well with Mrs. Driffield.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I believe they have some very good links there,”
she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">She introduced the Americans to Roy and me. I
was filled with admiration for the way in which Roy
rose to the occasion. It appeared that he had lectured
before the University of Virginia and had
stayed with a distinguished member of the faculty.
It had been an unforgettable experience. He did not
know whether he had been more impressed by the
lavish hospitality with which those charming Virginians
had entertained him or by their intelligent
interest in art and literature. He asked how So and
So was, and So and So; he had made lifelong friends
there, and it looked as though everyone he had met
was good and kind and clever. Soon the young professor
was telling Roy how much he liked his books,
and Roy was modestly telling him what in this one
and the other his aim had been and how conscious
he was that he had come far short of achieving it.
Mrs. Driffield listened with smiling sympathy, but
I had a feeling that her smile was growing a trifle
strained. It may be that Roy had too, for he suddenly
broke off.</p>

<p class="pindent">“But you don’t want me to bore you with my
stuff,” he said in his loud hearty way. “I’m only
here because Mrs. Driffield has entrusted to me the
great honour of writing Edward Driffield’s Life.”</p>

<p class="pindent">This of course interested the visitors very much.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s some job, believe me,” said Roy, playfully
American. “Fortunately I have the assistance of Mrs.
Driffield, who was not only a perfect wife, but an
admirable amanuensis and secretary; the materials
she has placed at my disposal are so amazingly full
that really little remains for me to do but take advantage
of her industry and her—her affectionate
zeal.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Driffield looked down demurely at the carpet
and the two young Americans turned on her their
large dark eyes in which you could read their sympathy,
their interest, and their respect. After a little
more conversation—partly literary but also about
golf, for the visitors admitted that they hoped to get
a round or two at Rye, and here again Roy was on
the spot, for he told them to look out for such and
such a bunker and when they came to London hoped
they would play with him at Sunningdale; after this,
I say, Mrs. Driffield got up and offered to show them
Edward’s study and bedroom, and of course the garden.
Roy rose to his feet, evidently bent on accompanying
them, but Mrs. Driffield gave him a little
smile; it was pleasant but firm.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Don’t you bother to come, Roy,” she said. “I’ll
take them round. You stay here and talk to Mr.
Ashenden.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, all right. Of course.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The strangers bade us farewell and Roy and I
settled down again in the chintz armchairs.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Jolly room this is,” said Roy.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Very.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Amy had to work hard to get it. You know the
old man bought this house two or three years before
they were married. She tried to make him sell it,
but he wouldn’t. He was very obstinate in some ways.
You see, it belonged to a certain Miss Wolfe, whose
bailiff his father was, and he said that when he was
a little boy his one idea was to own it himself and
now he’d got it he was going to keep it. One would
have thought the last thing he’d want to do was
to live in a place where everyone knew all about
his origins and everything. Once poor Amy very
nearly engaged a housemaid before she discovered
she was Edward’s great-niece. When Amy came
here the house was furnished from attic to cellar
in the best Tottenham Court Road manner; you
know the sort of thing, Turkey carpets and mahogany
sideboards, and a plush-covered suite in the
drawing room, and modern marquetry. It was his
idea of how a gentleman’s house should be furnished.
Amy says it was simply awful. He wouldn’t let
her change a thing and she had to go to work with
the greatest care; she says she simply couldn’t have
lived in it and she was determined to have things
right, so she had to change things one by one so that
he didn’t pay any attention. She told me the hardest
job she had was with his writing desk. I don’t know
whether you’ve noticed the one there is in his study
now. It’s a very good period piece; I wouldn’t mind
having it myself. Well, he had a horrible American
roll-top desk. He’d had it for years and he’d written
a dozen books on it and he simply wouldn’t part with
it, he had no feeling for things like that; he just happened
to be attached to it because he’d had it so long.
You must get Amy to tell you the story how she managed
to get rid of it in the end. It’s really priceless.
She’s a remarkable woman, you know; she generally
gets her own way.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ve noticed it,” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">It had not taken her long to dispose of Roy when
he showed signs of wishing to go over the house with
the visitors. He gave me a quick look and laughed.
Roy was not stupid.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You don’t know America as well as I do,” he said.
“They always prefer a live mouse to a dead lion.
That’s one of the reasons why I like America.”</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XXV</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">When Mrs. Driffield</span>, having sent the pilgrims on
their way, came back she bore under her arm a portfolio.</p>

<p class="pindent">“What very nice young men!” she said. “I wish
young men in England took such a keen interest in
literature. I gave them that photo of Edward when
he was dead and they asked me for one of mine, and
I signed it for them.” Then very graciously: “You
made a great impression on them, Roy. They said
it was a real privilege to meet you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ve lectured in America so much,” said Roy,
with modesty.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, but they’ve read your books. They say that
what they like about them is that they’re so virile.”</p>

<p class="pindent">The portfolio contained a number of old photographs,
groups of schoolboys among whom I recognized
an urchin with untidy hair as Driffield only because
his widow pointed him out, Rugby fifteens with
Driffield a little older, and then one of a young sailor
in a jersey and a reefer jacket, Driffield when he ran
away to sea.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Here’s one taken when he was first married,”
said Mrs. Driffield.</p>

<p class="pindent">He wore a beard and black-and-white check
trousers; in his buttonhole was a large white rose
backed by maidenhair and on the table beside him a
chimney-pot hat.</p>

<p class="pindent">“And here is the bride,” said Mrs. Driffield, trying
not to smile.</p>

<p class="pindent">Poor Rosie, seen by a country photographer over
forty years ago, was grotesque. She was standing
very stiffly against a background of baronial hall,
holding a large bouquet; her dress was elaborately
draped, pinched at the waist, and she wore a bustle.
Her fringe came down to her eyes. On her head was
a wreath of orange blossoms, perched high on a
mass of hair, and from it was thrown back a long
veil. Only I knew how lovely she must have looked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“She looks fearfully common,” said Roy.</p>

<p class="pindent">“She was,” murmured Mrs. Driffield.</p>

<p class="pindent">We looked at more photographs of Edward, photographs
that had been taken of him when he began
to be known, photographs when he wore only a
moustache and others, all the later ones, when he
was clean-shaven. You saw his face grown thinner
and more lined. The stubborn commonplace of the
early portraits melted gradually into a weary refinement.
You saw the change in him wrought by experience,
thought, and achieved ambition. I looked again
at the photograph of the young sailorman and
fancied that I saw in it already a trace of that aloofness
that seemed to me so marked in the older ones
and that I had had years before the vague sensation
of in the man himself. The face you saw was a mask
and the actions he performed without significance.
I had an impression that the real man, to his death
unknown and lonely, was a wraith that went a silent
way unseen between the writer of his books and the
fellow who led his life, and smiled with ironical detachment
at the two puppets that the world took for
Edward Driffield. I am conscious that in what I have
written of him I have not presented a living man,
standing on his feet, rounded, with comprehensible
motives and logical activities; I have not tried to:
I am glad to leave that to the abler pen of Alroy
Kear.</p>

<p class="pindent">I came across the photographs that Harry Retford,
the actor, had taken of Rosie, and then a photograph
of the picture that Lionel Hillier had painted of her.
It gave me a pang. That was how I best remembered
her. Notwithstanding the old-fashioned gown, she
was alive there and tremulous with the passion that
filled her. She seemed to offer herself to the assault
of love.</p>

<p class="pindent">“She gives you the impression of a hefty wench,”
said Roy.</p>

<p class="pindent">“If you like the milkmaid type,” answered Mrs.
Driffield. “I’ve always thought she looked rather like
a white nigger.”</p>

<p class="pindent">That was what Mrs. Barton Trafford had been
fond of calling her, and with Rosie’s thick lips and
broad nose there was indeed a hateful truth in the
criticism. But they did not know how silvery golden
her hair was, nor how golden silver her skin; they
did not know her enchanting smile.</p>

<p class="pindent">“She wasn’t a bit like a white nigger,” I said. “She
was virginal like the dawn. She was like Hebe. She
was like a white rose.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Driffield smiled and exchanged a meaning
glance with Roy.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Mrs. Barton Trafford told me a great deal about
her. I don’t wish to seem spiteful, but I’m afraid I
don’t think that she can have been a very nice
woman.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s where you make a mistake,” I replied.
“She was a very nice woman. I never saw her in a
bad temper. You only had to say you wanted something
for her to give it to you. I never heard her say
a disagreeable thing about anyone. She had a heart
of gold.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She was a terrible slattern. Her house was always
in a mess; you didn’t like to sit down in a chair because
it was so dusty and you dared not look in the
corners. And it was the same with her person. She
could never put a skirt on straight and you’d see about
two inches of petticoat hanging down on one side.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“She didn’t bother about things like that. They
didn’t make her any the less beautiful. And she was
as good as she was beautiful.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy burst out laughing and Mrs. Driffield put her
hand up to her mouth to hide her smile.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, come, Mr. Ashenden, that’s really going too
far. After all, let’s face it, she was a nymphomaniac.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think that’s a very silly word,” I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, then, let me say that she can hardly have
been a very good woman to treat poor Edward as she
did. Of course it was a blessing in disguise. If she
hadn’t run away from him he might have had to bear
that burden for the rest of his life, and with such
a handicap he could never have reached the position
he did. But the fact remains that she was notoriously
unfaithful to him. From what I hear she was absolutely
promiscuous.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You don’t understand,” I said. “She was a very
simple woman. Her instincts were healthy and ingenuous.
She loved to make people happy. She loved
love.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do you call that love?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, then, the act of love. She was naturally
affectionate. When she liked anyone it was quite
natural for her to go to bed with him. She never
thought twice about it. It was not vice; it wasn’t lasciviousness;
it was her nature. She gave herself as
naturally as the sun gives heat or the flowers their
perfume. It was a pleasure to her and she liked to
give pleasure to others. It had no effect on her character;
she remained sincere, unspoiled, and artless.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Driffield looked as though she had taken a
dose of castor oil and had just been trying to get the
taste of it out of her mouth by sucking a lemon.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t understand,” she said. “But then I’m
bound to admit that I never understood what Edward
saw in her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Did he know that she was carrying on with all
sorts of people?” asked Roy.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m sure he didn’t,” she replied quickly.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You think him a bigger fool than I do, Mrs. Driffield,”
I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Then why did he put up with it?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I think I can tell you. You see, she wasn’t a woman
who ever inspired love. Only affection. It was absurd
to be jealous over her. She was like a clear deep pool
in a forest glade into which it’s heavenly to plunge,
but it is neither less cool nor less crystalline because
a tramp and a gipsy and a gamekeeper have plunged
into it before you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Roy laughed again and this time Mrs. Driffield
without concealment smiled thinly.</p>

<p class="pindent">“It’s comic to hear you so lyrical,” said Roy.</p>

<p class="pindent">I stifled a sigh. I have noticed that when I am most
serious people are apt to laugh at me, and indeed
when after a lapse of time I have read passages that
I wrote from the fullness of my heart I have been
tempted to laugh at myself. It must be that there is
something naturally absurd in a sincere emotion,
though why there should be I cannot imagine, unless
it is that man, the ephemeral inhabitant of an insignificant
planet, with all his pain and all his striving
is but a jest in an eternal mind.</p>

<p class="pindent">I saw that Mrs. Driffield wished to ask me something.
It caused her a certain embarrassment.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Do you think he’d have taken her back if she’d
been willing to come?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You knew him better than I. I should say no. I
think that when he had exhausted an emotion he took
no further interest in the person who had aroused
it. I should say that he had a peculiar combination
of strong feeling and extreme callousness.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t know how you can say that,” cried Roy.
“He was the kindest man I ever met.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Mrs. Driffield looked at me steadily and then
dropped her eyes.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wonder what happened to her when she went
to America,” he asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I believe she married Kemp,” said Mrs. Driffield.
“I heard they had taken another name. Of
course they couldn’t show their faces over here
again.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“When did she die?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, about ten years ago.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“How did you hear?” I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“From Harold Kemp, the son; he’s in some sort
of business at Maidstone. I never told Edward. She’d
been dead to him for many years and I saw no reason
to remind him of the past. It always helps you if you
put yourself in other people’s shoes and I said to
myself that if I were he I shouldn’t want to be reminded
of an unfortunate episode of my youth. Don’t
you think I was right?”</p>

<div><h1><span style="font-family:'ch';">XXVI</span></h1></div>

<p class="noindent"><span class="sc">Mrs. Driffield</span> very kindly offered to send me back
to Blackstable in her car, but I preferred to walk.
I promised to dine at Ferne Court next day and
meanwhile to write down what I could remember of
the two periods during which I had been in the habit
of seeing Edward Driffield. As I walked along the
winding road, meeting no one by the way, I mused
upon what I should say. Do they not tell us that style
is the art of omission? If that is so I should certainly
write a very pretty piece, and it seemed almost a pity
that Roy should use it only as material. I chuckled
when I reflected what a bombshell I could throw if
I chose. There was one person who could tell them
all they wanted to know about Edward Driffield and
his first marriage; but this fact I proposed to keep
to myself. They thought Rosie was dead; they erred;
Rosie was very much alive.</p>

<p class="pindent">Being in New York for the production of a play
and my arrival having been advertised to all and
sundry by my manager’s energetic press representative,
I received one day a letter addressed in a handwriting
I knew but could not place. It was large and
round, firm but uneducated. It was so familiar to me
that I was exasperated not to remember whose it
was. It would have been more sensible to open the
letter at once, but instead I looked at the envelope
and racked my brain. There are handwritings I cannot
see without a little shiver of dismay and some
letters that look so tiresome that I cannot bring
myself to open them for a week. When at last I tore
open the envelope what I read gave me a strange
feeling. It began abruptly:</p>

<div class="blockquote">

<p class="pindent"><span class="it">I have just seen that you are in New York and
would like to see you again. I am not living in New
York any more, but Yonkers is quite close and if you
have a car you can easily do it in half an hour. I
expect you are very busy so leave it to you to make a
date. Although it is many years since we last met I
hope you have not forgotten your old friend</span></p>

<p class="line" style="text-align:right;margin-right:1em;"><span class="sc">Rose Iggulden</span> (<span class="it">formerly Driffield</span>)</p>

</div>

<p class="pindent">I looked at the address; it was the Albemarle, evidently
a hotel or an apartment house, then there was
the name of a street, and Yonkers. A shiver passed
through me as though someone had walked over my
grave. During the years that had passed I had sometimes
thought of Rosie, but of late I had said to myself
that she must surely be dead. I was puzzled for
a moment by the name. Why Iggulden and not Kemp?
Then it occurred to me that they had taken this name,
a Kentish one too, when they fled from England. My
first impulse was to make an excuse not to see her;
I am always shy of seeing again people I have not
seen for a long time; but then I was seized with
curiosity. I wanted to see what she was like and to
hear what had happened to her. I was going down to
Dobbs Ferry for the week-end, to reach which I had
to pass through Yonkers, and so answered that I
would come at about four on the following Saturday.</p>

<p class="pindent">The Albemarle was a huge block of apartments,
comparatively new, and it looked as though it were
inhabited by persons in easy circumstances. My name
was telephoned up by a Negro porter in uniform and
I was taken up in the elevator by another. I felt uncommonly
nervous. The door was opened for me by
a coloured maid.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Come right in,” she said. “Mrs. Iggulden’s expecting
you.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I was ushered into a living room that served also
as dining room, for at one end of it was a square
table of heavily carved oak, a dresser, and four
chairs of the kind that the manufacturers in Grand
Rapids would certainly describe as Jacobean. But
the other end was furnished with a Louis XV suite,
gilt and upholstered in pale blue damask; there were
a great many small tables, richly carved and gilt, on
which stood Sèvres vases with ormolu decorations
and nude bronze ladies with draperies flowing as
though in a howling gale that artfully concealed those
parts of their bodies that decency required; and each
one held at the end of a playfully outstretched arm an
electric lamp. The gramophone was the grandest
thing I had ever seen out of a shop window, all gilt
and shaped like a sedan chair and painted with Watteau
courtiers and their ladies.</p>

<p class="pindent">After I had waited for about five minutes a door
was opened and Rosie came briskly in. She gave me
both her hands.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, this is a surprise,” she said. “I hate to think
how many years it is since we met. Excuse me one
moment.” She went to the door and called: “Jessie,
you can bring the tea in. Mind the water’s boiling
properly.” Then, coming back: “The trouble I’ve
had to teach that girl to make tea properly, you’d
never believe.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Rosie was at least seventy. She was wearing a very
smart sleeveless frock of green chiffon, heavily
<span class="it">diamanté</span>, cut square at the neck and very short; it
fitted like a bursting glove. By her shape I gathered
that she wore rubber corsets. Her nails were blood-coloured
and her eyebrows plucked. She was stout,
and she had a double chin; the skin of her bosom,
although she had powdered it freely, was red, and her
face was red too. But she looked well and healthy
and full of beans. Her hair was still abundant, but
it was quite white, shingled and permanently waved.
As a young woman she had had soft, naturally waving
hair and these stiff undulations, as though she
had just come out of a hairdresser’s, seemed more
than anything else to change her. The only thing that
remained was her smile, which had still its old childlike
and mischievous sweetness. Her teeth had never
been very good, irregular and of bad shape; but
these now were replaced by a set of perfect evenness
and snowy brilliance; they were obviously the best
money could buy.</p>

<p class="pindent">The coloured maid brought in an elaborate tea
with <span class="it">pâté</span> sandwiches and cookies and candy and little
knives and forks and tiny napkins. It was all very
neat and smart.</p>

<p class="pindent">“That’s one thing I’ve never been able to do without—my tea,”
said Rosie, helping herself to a hot
buttered scone. “It’s my best meal, really, though I
know I shouldn’t eat it. My doctor keeps on saying
to me: ‘Mrs. Iggulden, you can’t expect to get your
weight down if you will eat half a dozen cookies at
tea.’ ” She gave me a smile, and I had a sudden inkling
that, notwithstanding the marcelled hair and the
powder and the fat, Rosie was the same as ever. “But
what I say is: A little of what you fancy does you
good.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I had always found her easy to talk to. Soon we
were chatting away as though it were only a few
weeks since we had last seen one another.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Were you surprised to get my letter? I put Driffield
so as you should know who it was from. We
took the name of Iggulden when we came to America.
George had a little unpleasantness when he left
Blackstable, perhaps you heard about it, and he
thought in a new country he’d better start with a new
name, if you understand what I mean.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I nodded vaguely.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Poor George, he died ten years ago, you know.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m sorry to hear that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, well, he was getting on in years. He was past
seventy though you’d never have guessed it to look
at him. It was a great blow to me. No woman could
want a better husband than what he made me. Never
a cross word from the day we married till the day
he died. And I’m pleased to say he left me very well
provided for.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m glad to know that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, he did very well over here. He went into
the building trade, he always had a fancy for it, and
he got in with Tammany. He always said the greatest
mistake he ever made was not coming over here
twenty years before. He liked the country from the
first day he set foot in it. He had plenty of go and
that’s what you want here. He was just the sort to
get on.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Have you never been back to England?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, I’ve never wanted to. George used to talk
about it sometimes, just for a trip, you know, but
we never got down to it, and now he’s gone I haven’t
got the inclination. I expect London would seem very
dead and alive to me after New York. We used to
live in New York, you know. I only came here after
his death.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What made you choose Yonkers?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I always fancied it. I used to say to George,
when we retire we’ll go and live at Yonkers. It’s
like a little bit of England to me; you know, Maidstone
or Guildford or some place like that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I smiled, but I understood what she meant. Notwithstanding
its trams and its tootling cars, its
cinemas and electric signs, Yonkers, with its winding
main street, has a faint air of an English market
town gone jazz.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Of course I sometimes wonder what’s happened
to all the folks at Blackstable. I suppose they’re most
of them dead by now and I expect they think I am
too.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I haven’t been there for thirty years.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I did not know then that the rumour of Rosie’s
death had reached Blackstable. I dare say that someone
had brought back the news that George Kemp
was dead and thus a mistake had arisen.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I suppose nobody knows here that you were Edward
Driffield’s first wife?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, no; why, if they had I should have had the
reporters buzzing around my apartment like a swarm
of bees. You know sometimes I’ve hardly been able
to help laughing when I’ve been out somewhere playing
bridge and they’ve started talking about Ted’s
books. They like him no end in America. I never
thought so much of them myself.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You never were a great novel reader, were you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I used to like history better, but I don’t seem to
have much time for reading now. Sunday’s my great
day. I think the Sunday papers over here are lovely.
You don’t have anything like them in England. Then
of course I play a lot of bridge; I’m crazy about
contract.”</p>

<p class="pindent">I remembered that when as a young boy I had first
met Rosie her uncanny skill at whist had impressed
me. I felt that I knew the sort of bridge player she
was, quick, bold, and accurate: a good partner and
a dangerous opponent.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You’d have been surprised at the fuss they made
over here when Ted died. I knew they thought a lot
of him, but I never knew he was such a big bug as all
that. The papers were full of him, and they had pictures
of him and Ferne Court; he always said he
meant to live in that house some day. Whatever made
him marry that hospital nurse? I always thought he’d
marry Mrs. Barton Trafford. They never had any
children, did they?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ted would have liked to have some. It was a
great blow to him that I couldn’t have any more after
the first.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I didn’t know you’d ever had a child,” I said with
surprise.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Oh, yes. That’s why Ted married me. But I had
a very bad time when it came and the doctors said
I couldn’t have another. If she’d lived, poor little
thing, I don’t suppose I’d ever have run away with
George. She was six when she died. A dear little thing
she was and as pretty as a picture.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“You never mentioned her.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, I couldn’t bear to speak about her. She got
meningitis and we took her to the hospital. They put
her in a private room and they let us stay with her.
I shall never forget what she went through, screaming,
screaming all the time, and nobody able to do
anything.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Rosie’s voice broke.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Was it that death Driffield described in <span class="it">The Cup
of Life</span>?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Yes, that’s it. I always thought it so funny of
Ted. He couldn’t bear to speak of it, any more than
I could, but he wrote it all down; he didn’t leave
out a thing; even little things I hadn’t noticed at the
time he put in and then I remembered them. You’d
think he was just heartless, but he wasn’t, he was
upset just as much as I was. When we used to go
home at night he’d cry like a child. Funny chap,
wasn’t he?”</p>

<p class="pindent">It was <span class="it">The Cup of Life</span> that had raised such a
storm of protest; and it was the child’s death and
the episode that followed it that had especially
brought down on Driffield’s head such virulent abuse.
I remembered the description very well. It was harrowing.
There was nothing sentimental in it; it did
not excite the reader’s tears, but his anger rather
that such cruel suffering should be inflicted on a little
child. You felt that God at the Judgment Day would
have to account for such things as this. It was a very
powerful piece of writing. But if this incident was
taken from life was the one that followed it also?
It was this that had shocked the public of the ’nineties
and this that the critics had condemned as not
only indecent but incredible. In <span class="it">The Cup of Life</span> the
husband and wife (I forget their names now) had
come back from the hospital after the child’s death—they
were poor people and they lived from hand to
mouth in lodgings—and had their tea. It was latish:
about seven o’clock. They were exhausted by the
strain of a week’s ceaseless anxiety and shattered by
their grief. They had nothing to say to one another.
They sat in a miserable silence. The hours passed.
Then on a sudden the wife got up and going into
their bedroom put on her hat.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’m going out,” she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“All right.”</p>

<p class="pindent">They lived near Victoria Station. She walked
along the Buckingham Palace Road and through the
park. She came into Piccadilly and went slowly toward
the Circus. A man caught her eye, paused and
turned round.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good-evening,” he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Good-evening.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She stopped and smiled.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Will you come and have a drink?” he asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t mind if I do.”</p>

<p class="pindent">They went into a tavern in one of the side streets
of Piccadilly, where harlots congregated and men
came to pick them up, and they drank a glass of beer.
She chatted with the stranger and laughed with him.
She told him a cock-and-bull story about herself.
Presently he asked if he could go home with her; no,
she said, he couldn’t do that, but they could go to a
hotel. They got into a cab and drove to Bloomsbury
and there they took a room for the night. And next
morning she took a bus to Trafalgar Square and
walked through the park; when she got home her
husband was just sitting down to breakfast. After
breakfast they went back to the hospital to see about
the child’s funeral.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Will you tell me something, Rosie?” I asked.
“What happened in the book after the child’s death—did
that happen too?”</p>

<p class="pindent">She looked at me for a moment doubtfully; then
her lips broke into her still beautiful smile.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, it’s all so many years ago, what odds does
it make? I don’t mind telling you. He didn’t get it
quite right. You see, it was only guesswork on his
part. I was surprised that he knew as much as he
did; I never told him anything.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Rosie took a cigarette and pensively tapped its end
on the table, but she did not light it.</p>

<p class="pindent">“We came back from the hospital just like he said.
We walked back; I felt I couldn’t sit still in a cab,
and I felt all dead inside me. I’d cried so much I
couldn’t cry any more, and I was tired. Ted tried to
comfort me, but I said: ‘For God’s sake shut up.’
After that he didn’t say any more. We had rooms
in the Vauxhall Bridge Road then, on the second
floor, just a sitting room and a bedroom, that’s why
we’d had to take the poor little thing to the hospital;
we couldn’t nurse her in lodgings; besides, the landlady
said she wouldn’t have it, and Ted said she’d
be looked after better at the hospital. She wasn’t a
bad sort, the landlady; she’d been a tart and Ted
used to talk to her by the hour together. She came
up when she heard us come in.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘How’s the little girl to-night?’ she said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘She’s dead,’ said Ted.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I couldn’t say anything. Then she brought up the
tea. I didn’t want anything, but Ted made me eat
some ham. Then I sat at the window. I didn’t look
round when the landlady came up to clear away, I
didn’t want anyone to speak to me. Ted was reading
a book; at least he was pretending to, but he didn’t
turn the pages, and I saw the tears dropping on it.
I kept on looking out of the window. It was the end
of June, the twenty-eighth, and the days were long.
It was just near the corner where we lived and I
looked at the people going in and out of the public
house and the trams going up and down. I thought
the day would never come to an end; then all of a
sudden I noticed that it was night. All the lamps were
lit. There were an awful lot of people in the street.
I felt so tired. My legs were like lead.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Why don’t you light the gas?’ I said to Ted.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Do you want it?’ he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘It’s no good sitting in the dark,’ I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“He lit the gas. He began smoking his pipe. I
knew that would do him good. But I just sat and
looked at the street. I don’t know what came over
me. I felt that if I went on sitting in that room I’d
go mad. I wanted to go somewhere where there were
lights and people. I wanted to get away from Ted;
no, not so much that, I wanted to get away from all
that Ted was thinking and feeling. We only had two
rooms. I went into the bedroom; the child’s cot was
still there, but I wouldn’t look at it. I put on my hat
and a veil and I changed my dress and then I went
back to Ted.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘I’m going out,’ I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Ted looked at me. I dare say he noticed I’d got
my new dress on and perhaps something in the way
I spoke made him see I didn’t want him.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘All right,’ he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“In the book he made me walk through the park,
but I didn’t do that really. I went down to Victoria
and I took a hansom to Charing Cross. It was only
a shilling fare. Then I walked up the Strand. I’d made
up my mind what I wanted to do before I came out.
Do you remember Harry Retford? Well, he was
acting at the Adelphi then, he had the second comedy
part. Well, I went to the stage door, and sent up
my name. I always liked Harry Retford. I expect
he was a bit unscrupulous and he was rather funny
over money matters, but he could make you laugh
and with all his faults he was a rare good sort. You
know he was killed in the Boer War, don’t you?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I didn’t. I only knew he’d disappeared and one
never saw his name on playbills; I thought perhaps
he’d gone into business or something.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No, he went out at once. He was killed at Ladysmith.
After I’d been waiting a bit he came down and
I said: ‘Harry, let’s go on the razzle to-night. What
about a bit of supper at Romano’s?’ ‘Not ’alf,’ he
said. ‘You wait here and the minute the show’s over
and I’ve got my make-up off I’ll come down.’ It made
me feel better just to see him; he was playing a
racing tout and it made me laugh just to look at him
in his check suit and his billycock hat and his red
nose. Well, I waited till the end of the show and then
he came down and we walked along to Romano’s.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Are you hungry?’ he said to me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Starving,’ I said; and I was.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Let’s have the best,’ he said, ‘and blow the expense.
I told Bill Terris I was taking my best girl
out to supper and I touched him for a couple of quid.’</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Let’s have champagne,’ I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Three cheers for the widow!’ he said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I don’t know if you ever went to Romano’s in the
old days. It was fine. You used to see all the theatrical
people and the racing men, and the girls from the
Gaiety used to go there. It was <span class="it">the</span> place. And the
Roman. Harry knew him and he came up to our
table; he used to talk in funny broken English; I
believe he put it on because he knew it made people
laugh. And if someone he knew was down and out
he’d always lend him a fiver.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘How’s the kid?’ said Harry.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘Better,’ I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I didn’t want to tell him the truth. You know
how funny men are; they don’t understand some
things. I knew Harry would think it dreadful of me
to come out to supper when the poor child was lying
dead in the hospital. He’d be awfully sorry and all
that, but that’s not what I wanted; I wanted to
laugh.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Rosie lit the cigarette that she had been playing
with.</p>

<p class="pindent">“You know how when a woman is having a baby,
sometimes the husband can’t stand it any more and
he goes out and has another woman. And then when
she finds out, and it’s funny how often she does, she
kicks up no end of a fuss; she says, that the man
should go and do it just then, when she’s going
through hell, well, it’s the limit. I always tell her not
to be silly. It doesn’t mean he doesn’t love her, and
isn’t terribly upset, it doesn’t mean anything, it’s just
nerves; if he weren’t so upset he wouldn’t think of
it. I know, because that’s how I felt then.</p>

<p class="pindent">“When we’d finished our supper Harry said:
‘Well, what about it?’</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘What about what?’ I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“There wasn’t any dancing in those days and there
was nowhere we could go.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘What about coming round to my flat and having
a look at my photograph album?’ said Harry.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘I don’t mind if I do,’ I said.</p>

<p class="pindent">“He had a little bit of a flat in the Charing Cross
Road, just two rooms and a bath and a kitchenette,
and we drove round there, and I stayed the night.</p>

<p class="pindent">“When I got back next morning the breakfast was
already on the table and Ted had just started. I’d
made up my mind that if he said anything I was going
to fly out at him. I didn’t care what happened. I’d
earned my living before, and I was ready to earn it
again. For two pins I’d have packed my box and left
him there and then. But he just looked up as I came in.</p>

<p class="pindent">“ ‘You’ve just come in time,’ he said. ‘I was going
to eat your sausage.’</p>

<p class="pindent">“I sat down and poured him out his tea. And he
went on reading the paper. After we’d finished breakfast
we went to the hospital. He never asked me
where I’d been. I didn’t know what he thought. He
was terribly kind to me all that time. I was miserable,
you know. Somehow I felt that I just couldn’t get
over it, and there was nothing he didn’t do to make
it easier for me.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What did you think when you read the book?”
I asked.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, it did give me a turn to see that he did
know pretty well what had happened that night.
What beat me was his writing it at all. You’d have
thought it was the last thing he’d put in a book.
You’re queer fish, you writers.”</p>

<p class="pindent">At that moment the telephone bell rang. Rosie took
up the receiver and listened.</p>

<p class="pindent">“Why, Mr. Vanuzzi, how very nice of you to call
me up! Oh, I’m pretty well, thank you. Well, pretty
and well, if you like. When you’re my age you take
all the compliments you can get.”</p>

<p class="pindent">She embarked upon a conversation which, I gathered
from her tone, was of a facetious and even flirtatious
character. I did not pay much attention, and
since it seemed to prolong itself I began to meditate
upon the writer’s life. It is full of tribulation. First
he must endure poverty and the world’s indifference;
then, having achieved a measure of success, he must
submit with a good grace to its hazards. He depends
upon a fickle public. He is at the mercy of journalists
who want to interview him and photographers who
want to take his picture, of editors who harry him
for copy and tax gatherers who harry him for income
tax, of persons of quality who ask him to lunch
and secretaries of institutes who ask him to lecture,
of women who want to marry him and women who
want to divorce him, of youths who want his autograph,
actors who want parts and strangers who
want a loan, of gushing ladies who want advice
on their matrimonial affairs and earnest young men
who want advice on their compositions, of agents,
publishers, managers, bores, admirers, critics, and
his own conscience. But he has one compensation.
Whenever he has anything on his mind, whether it
be a harassing reflection, grief at the death of a
friend, unrequited love, wounded pride, anger at the
treachery of someone to whom he has shown kindness,
in short any emotion or any perplexing thought,
he has only to put it down in black and white, using
it as the theme of a story or the decoration of an
essay, to forget all about it. He is the only free man.</p>

<p class="pindent">Rosie put back the receiver and turned to me.</p>

<p class="pindent">“That was one of my beaux. I’m going to play
bridge to-night and he rang up to say he’d call round
for me in his car. Of course he’s a Wop, but he’s real
nice. He used to run a big grocery store down town,
in New York, but he’s retired now.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Have you never thought of marrying again,
Rosie?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“No.” She smiled. “Not that I haven’t had offers.
I’m quite happy as I am. The way I look on it is
this, I don’t want to marry an old man, and it would
be silly at my age to marry a young one. I’ve had my
time and I’m ready to call it a day.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“What made you run away with George Kemp?”</p>

<p class="pindent">“Well, I’d always liked him. I knew him long before
I knew Ted, you know. Of course I never thought
there was any chance of marrying him. For one thing
he was married already and then he had his position
to think of. And then when he came to me one day
and said that everything had gone wrong and he was
bust and there’d be a warrant out for his arrest in
a few days and he was going to America and would
I go with him, well, what could I do? I couldn’t let
him go all that way by himself, with no money perhaps,
and him having been always so grand and living
in his own house and driving his own trap. It wasn’t
as if I was afraid of work.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I sometimes think he was the only man you ever
cared for,” I suggested.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I dare say there’s some truth in that.”</p>

<p class="pindent">“I wonder what it was you saw in him.”</p>

<p class="pindent">Rosie’s eyes travelled to a picture on the wall that
for some reason had escaped my notice. It was an
enlarged photograph of Lord George in a carved
gilt frame. It looked as if it might have been taken
soon after his arrival in America; perhaps at the
time of their marriage. It was a three-quarter length.
It showed him in a long frock coat, tightly buttoned,
and a tall silk hat cocked rakishly on one side of his
head; there was a large rose in his buttonhole; under
one arm he carried a silver-headed cane and smoke
curled from a big cigar that he held in his right hand.
He had a heavy moustache, waxed at the ends, a
saucy look in his eye, and in his bearing an arrogant
swagger. In his tie was a horseshoe in diamonds. He
looked like a publican dressed up in his best to go
to the Derby.</p>

<p class="pindent">“I’ll tell you,” said Rosie. “He was always such a
perfect gentleman.”</p>
